1


Dynamic road lane management study: A Smart City application




                                    abstract

Our Smart City contribution is transportation-oriented in that  it proposes a dynamic road
lane management system in order to share appropriately the space devoted to trafﬁc. After
a historical view of a series of solutions from physical to ICT supported, wepresent our proposal
extensively supported by up-to-date ICT. Following a main presentation,we describe the system
architecture and its working conditions. Then, we present the proposed simulator designed to study
operating and driver’s conditions with  respect to the new trafﬁc signs proposed. 
We also describe a Mock-up technology validation and give preliminary information on in-the-ﬁeld  deployment.


Keywords:
                                                                       
Smart City
                                                                       
Ambient intelligence
Ubiquitous computing                                                                                                                 
Data vitalization
Location-Based Services
Mobile internet
Internet of Things
Dynamic lane allocation
Simulations
Acceptability studies




1. Introduction


     In recent  years, the ‘‘Smart  City’’ concept  has emerged to describe  how investments   in human  and social  capital  and mod-
ern Information   and Communication    Technologies (ICT) infrastructure    and e-services  fuel sustainable  growth   and quality   of
life for  its  inhabitants   and workers.
     In Smart  City systems,  two  opposite  approaches can  be used: (1)  Elaboration  of an  opportunistic   system  allowing   access
to  collected  information    and  its   ‘‘vitalization’’    by  integration–interaction–aggregation       in  a  non-predetermined    way;   (2)
Well-deﬁned   systems  able to  solve identiﬁed   problems,  working   in  a speciﬁc  clearly-deﬁned   and  modeled  situation.
     In the  ﬁrst case, according  to Xiong  (2012), the  ‘‘Smart City’’  principle   in opportunistic   perception   is based on the  concept
of ‘‘Data Vitalization’’.   The idea is to give  data life, to  combine separated  data by avoiding  information    islands, to build  a combination
between  each  type of  data, and  to increase  utilization   of  data. The main  issue  concerns sharing  and  integration   of
data that were  initially   separated  due to their  types and  different  collection  methods. New    contextual  access and use of these
data are fundamental   in  relation   with  emerging   non-expected  situations.

 

2
                                                      
    While in our international China–France academic research projectwe study these two approaches, in this paperwe focus
on explaining the second approach oriented to a precise Smart City system, the goal of which is to solve a particular problem
related to trafﬁc management in conﬁned circulation infrastructure, avoiding congestion by better allocation of trafﬁc lanes.
In this case ‘‘data vitalization’’ is not the main goal. In our case, we have chosen to study the design and implementation of a
system, allowing appropriate use by private and professional vehicles and their drivers of a limited circulation infrastructure
by extensive use of ICT (Information and Communication Technologies).
    Consequently, our main contributions to this paper are: (1) Identiﬁcation of main characteristics and design of an inteligent
road lane management system as a Smart City application; (2) Integration of ICT and appropriate user interfaces in the
system, allowing effective communication and collaboration among actors; (3)  Development of a simulator validating
system function designed to study drivers’ acceptability and security of proposed User Interfaces, mainly oriented toward
new trafﬁc sign understanding and interpretation in  dynamic driving conditions; (4) Technology validation of main ICT
principles used in the mock-up, namely: Location-Based Services (LBS) and Internet of Things (IoT).
    The next sections of this paper are structured as follows. After a state-of-the-art in dynamic management of road lines
from  historical, concrete and  bibliographical  points of  view,  we  present the  main  characteristics of  our  extensive
ICT-based dynamic road lane management system. Then, we describe its architecture from physical and digital point of
views with the ICT technologies used. The following section is devoted to presenting the simulator with its organization,
functionalities and main utilizations. A technology validation mock-up is explained in the next section, while the last section
is devoted to presenting the results and the in-the-ﬁeld deployment process. This paper ends with some conclusions and
expected prospective actions.


2. State-of-the-art in dynamic  management of road lanes

    Our study  concerns dynamic management of road trafﬁc, which  is regularly increasing both  in towns  and outside
built-up urban areas. The ﬁrst approach designed to allow increase in trafﬁc leads to solutions such as increasing the number of lanes,
while the second approach aims at segmenting trafﬁc according to categories (private vehicles, heavy vehicles,
public transportation, priority vehicles) by proposing speciﬁc development and trafﬁc rules, with, in particular, the
creation of specialized lanes (bus, tram, trolley). This second choice can lead to satisfactory solutions provided that there
is sufﬁcient space.
    When space is lacking and the frequency of this type of specialized trafﬁc is not sufﬁcient, there is a sense of waste and
poor management. A third solution then emerges, i.e. dynamic allocation of lanes to different types of transportation. A signiﬁcant
study consisting of data gathering, analysis and classiﬁcation was carried out by Nouvier from the CERTU (Center for
studies on networks, transportation, urbanism and public construction) (Nouvier, 2007), (Fig. 1).
    Nouvier (2007) collected and presented a large number of varied solutions, from the more physical (ad hoc movement of
low walls with  trucks) to  the more informational (signposts with  variable displays), enabling lesser or greater speed of
dynamicity. For  dynamic bus  lane allocation  it  is  important  to  mention  Lisbon experiment  (Viegas and Lu,  2004;
Viegas et al., 2007). We were also inspired by two works (Dept. of Transportation, 2009; Guler and Menendez, 2013).


3. Our ICT-based dynamic road lane management system

    It is an established fact today that telematics or embedded and/or mobile ICTs can provide solutions leading to a very high
dynamicity (clear a lane for a bus or an ambulance in real time), provided that users are sufﬁciently informed and that regulations
are complied with in terms of transportation (or suggestions to modify it) and, in particular, of user safety. Hereafter,
we give a brief description of the ICT vision, in a system-perspective.
    ‘‘Dynamic circulation  lane allocation’’ aims  at providing  a system designed to  share circulation lanes dynamically
between public transportation (buses) or rescue services (ﬁre-ﬁghters and ambulances) and personal vehicle transportation
in order to share trafﬁc lanes appropriately in the context of low frequency of specialized trafﬁc or lack of space (impossibility or
inadequacy of static allocation of circulation lanes). When there are no buses, all lanes are allocated to general
trafﬁc.When a bus approaches and on the bus driver’s request, the right-hand lane is reserved for it. Once the bus has passed,
the reserved lane is returned to general trafﬁc (Fig. 2). However, if all lanes are already jammed, the system switches to
‘‘static mode’’, i.e. the right-hand lane is allocated to buses permanently. More sophisticated situations are also possible
(Fig. 3). In (Fig. 3a and b) a one-way sharing line  in the  narrow part  is alternatively used by  opposite running buses.
Whentwoopposite running buses are present at the same time, two lanes are allocated to them and only one lane is devoted
to personal vehicles (Fig. 3c). In (Fig. 3a and b) the change in orientation of the central lane is proposed. Dynamicity is less in
this case because, for security reasons, long periods of time are needed to be sure that no buses are still engaged in this lane
at the time of change.


3.1. Overall view

    The global view of our approach is shown in Fig. 4. The infrastructure is based on a multi-lane road with sensors allocated
under and near it, vertical and horizontal signs with associated actuators, and a management system connecting them. On

3












                                                                                         (a) Heavy solutions











                                                                        (b) Golden bridge SF manual dynamicity











                                                                                     (c) More easier solutions
















                                                            (d) ICT based solutions with horizontal and vertical signs










                                                     (e) Emergency / Stop lane use and driving orientation reversibility


                                                                       Fig. 1. Set of existing solutions (Nouvier, 2007).




the road, sensors, collecting  trafﬁc  situations   and speciﬁc demands  from  authorized  drivers  (buses, emergency  vehicles, etc.),
are able to communicate   observed  situations  to  the management   system. This system  is able  to decide on  appropriate  reactions  complying
with   the management   policy  elaborated   by  trafﬁc  authorities,   and  propagates  appropriate   commands  to
vertical  and  horizontal   road  signs as well   as the  new  system  status  to all  users  by appropriate   media  (radio,  GSM, Wi-Fi,
etc.) to  inform   them  of  expected  behavior   (use of  reserved  lanes  for  a bus  by  non-priority    drivers  if  no  bus  is expected,
leaving  a lane which   is now  reserved  for  priority   drivers  when  a bus  is approaching,  etc.).

4
                                                             





                                                                                                          BUS



                                                                             BUS



                                                     BUS






                                                                     Fig. 2. Dynamic circulation lane allocation example.


































                                                                   Fig. 3. More sophisticated situations are also possible.




3.2. System architecture


     System architecture   aims  at identifying    the  main  components  and  information   exchanges  (Fig. 5). In  and near  the  road
lanes, information   sensors are installed   to collect  the  state of the  trafﬁc  and  priority   requests. In  and near the  lanes, vertical
and horizontal   signaling   is also  implemented,   able to  receive  positioning   commands   from  the  management  system.  Main
users of  the  system  are active  users  such  as bus  drivers,  ambulances,  ﬁremen,  possibly   trucks  with   their   vehicles  which
require  behavioral  changes on  lane allocation.  Passive users, mainly   personal  vehicles, are  receivers of  the imposed  modiﬁcations
either   by  observation   of  displayers’   changes,  or  by   means  of  more  direct   information     sent  to  in-vehicle    User
Interfaces.  Other  circulation    infrastructure    users are  pedestrians,  cyclists,   etc. also  concerned  by  infrastructure    changes.
The last category  of users consists  of trafﬁc  and  information   managers, who  are either   decision-makers  of  regulation  strategies or
concerned  by  trafﬁc  information    broadcast  to external   information   systems  such as specialized  media,  and  TV.
     All  the  elements  are included   in  the  management  system,  i.e.  collecting,  aggregating,  processing  and  broadcasting  the
appropriate  information    to  all users. This  system  vision  (Fig. 5)  involves  the  main  elements, namely:


sensors in  the  lane concerned  by  collecting  trafﬁc   situations  and  priority   requests;
vehicles  of users who  request priority   and  receive information   regarding  the  state of  the lanes (allocation   of lanes, 
authorized  or unauthorized   dynamic   priority   requests)  for  on-board  display;

5






























                                                            Fig. 4. Global view of the dynamic lane allocation environment.































                                                                               Fig. 5. System architecture diagram.



vehicles  of passive userswho  cannot  take action,  but whoreceive    information   regarding  the state of  the lanes (whether   or
     not  they  are  dynamically   allocated   to  different   user  categories:  prohibited    lanes, lanes  reserved  for  priority    vehicles,
     unmarked  lanes);
the regulation   PC. This is a vital component  for  coordination,   which  chooses the lane management  mode:  static  allocation
     when trafﬁc   is heavy with  a large number  of buses or  prioritized   vehicles justifying   static  allocation  of prioritized   lanes, or
     dynamic  allocation  if  bus trafﬁc  is less and there are more  personal vehicles.  Action  by the regulation   PC is not systematic,
     and occurs  only  when  the  management  mode  changes (from  static  to  dynamic  and  vice versa).


     The core of  the  management  (computing)   system  is structured   in  four  modules:


The information    collection   module,  charged with   receiving  the  information    sent by  in-environment    sensors and  propagating
it  to the  priority   managers  and the  Regulation  PC.

6
                                                      
The priority manager is responsible for applying the lane road allocation strategy as decided by the Regulation PC: static
    mode if trafﬁc is heavy, or dynamic mode if it seems better to blend the trafﬁc and allocate lanes on request.
Infrastructure management propagates priority manager choices to vertical (variable message signs) and horizontal (on
    the road) signaling;
The information broadcasting module is charged with propagating the current situation to all circulation users and media.

    In this dynamic system, real time data exchange between vehicles and infrastructure must take place as automatically as
possible and in compliance with environmental constraints. Human participation in  these activities must be limited  to
essential situations, as human resources are the most critical, and must be primarily devoted to driving activities. In this
way, communication must be established between things (in the IoT approach), allowing actuators (in vehicles), sensors
(on the road) and other system elements to communicate mainly without human participation.



3.3. Internet of Things

    The Internet of Things allows static and dynamic environmental objects to communicate and update real situations. The
basic idea behind the concept of the Internet of Things (IoT) is the pervasive presence around us of a variety of things or
objects – such as Radio-Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFID) tags, sensors, actuators, mobile phones, etc. which, through unique
addressing schemes, are able to interact with each other and cooperate with  their  neighbors to reach common goals
(Ambient Intelligence Laboratory, 2013).
    At ﬁrst  glance, the concept of the IoT recalls the idea of Ambient Intelligence (AmI) and Ubiquitous Computing (UC).
The former refers to  electronic environments that are  sensitive and responsive to the presence of people. In an  AmI
world, devices work together to support people in carrying out their everyday life activities, tasks and rituals in an easy,
natural way, using information and intelligence that are hidden in the  network connecting these devices; when devices
are smaller and more integrated into our environment, only the user interface remains perceivable by users (Weiser and
Brown, 2013). UC focuses on the omnipresence of processing devices, which are small, inexpensive, robust, networked,
and distributed at all scales (Atzori et al., 2010). The concept of the IoT is closely linked to AmI and UC, but its central
issues are to make full interoperability of interconnected devices possible, providing them with an ever higher degree of
smartness by enabling  their  adaptation  and  autonomous behavior, while  guaranteeing trust,  privacy  and  security
(Atzori et al., 2010).
    As stated by the author of Yu et al. (2011), advanced cars, trains, buses as well as bicycles along with roads and/or rails are
becoming increasingly more instrumented with sensors, actuators, and processing power; roads themselves and transported
goods are also equipped with tags and sensors that send important information to trafﬁc control sites and transportation
vehicles to better route trafﬁc and help manage depots. Several works have been carried out to describe IoT applications
in the transportation and logistics domain. We can state that parking sensor information and trafﬁc data from the streets
of Barcelona are processed by API web services to provide output on available parking places in the designated area, including trafﬁc conditions
and estimated arrival time for each parking spot.
    From a technological point of view, to integrate ‘‘anything’’ into the Internet, identiﬁcation, sensing and communication
technologies are key elements. One of the most widely used is RFID systems, consisting of readers and tags. The tags are
attached to each object with its unique identiﬁer and related information stored inside it. Whenreceiving appropriate signals
from the reader, a tag nearby can respond to the query to announce its presence and transmit the information contained.
Thus, RFID systems could be used to supervise the status of objects in real-time, where objects do not necessarily have to
be within sight. Due to the cheap cost and low energy consumption of RFID systems, their use has become widespread in
industry, especially in the trading network (National Intelligence Council, 2008). Auto-ID Labs (2013), a leading global network
of academic research laboratories in the ﬁeld of networked RFIDs, hasmade tremendous efforts toward standardization
with its successor ECPglobal (2013).
    Sensor networks are also crucial parts in the IoT architecture. According to the author of Atzori et al. (2010), sensor networks
are able to cooperate with RFID systems to better track the status of objects, i.e., their location, temperature, movements, etc. 
Sensor networks are made up of a large number of nodes distributed in a certain way, which will report sensing
results to a small number of nodes (sink). A huge amount of research work has been carried out on sensor networks in recent
decades, to tackle problems at all layers of the protocol stack (Akyildiz et al., 2002). Besides ordinary objects, devices in
which a certain degree of intelligence is embedded also need to be included in the network. Varying according to implementation, 
communication technologies in smart devices could be Zigbee, Bluetooth, low-power WIFI and 6LoWPAN (Hui and
Culler, 2008a, 2008b; IPSO, 2013), enabling their connections to the network.
    Due to the heterogeneity of the objects and the diversity of the applications and services based on them, the IoT architecture usually
contains a software layer or a set of sub-layers which is interposed between the low level of objects and
the high level of  applications. The layer(s) can also be referred to as middleware. In recent years, the Service Oriented
Architecture (SOA) approach has been widely  adopted to  build  the  IoT middleware  solution (Jiang and  Yao, 2006;
Bellavista et al., 2008), since the SOA contains a service composition layer and/or a service management layer and allows
easy reuse or mash-up of services. More technical explanations would seem out of the scope of this paper and its audience.

7


3.4. Location-Based Services

    Contextualization is a second important aspect of this kind of systems. All exchanges in the system must be carried out
just in time and, for the most part, dependon location. Communicationbetween a bus and a detection sensor on the road, the
goal of which is to inform the system that a bus is approaching, thus leading to a lane allocation change, must be conducted
at an appropriate distance, in order to allow system reaction according to the actual ﬂuidity of the trafﬁc (Csinger, 1995). The
Location-Based approach is the answer to this problem (World Geodetic System, 2013).
    Location-Based Services (LBS) provide mobile users with personalized services according to their locations. In actual fact,
LBS have evolved from online map services and other internet Geographical Information Systems (GIS) applications to the
current form where more lightweight mobile devices (smart phones, wearable computers, etc.) are used to deliver services,
thanks to the development of Global Positioning Systems (GPS) and other location sensing technologies (Hu and Lee, 2004).
The authors of Daganzo and Geroliminis (2008) view the evolution of LBS from other perspectives, (a) from reactive to proactive, 
(b) from self- to cross-referencing and (c) from single- to multi-target: reactive LBSs are explicitly invoked by the user,
while proactive LBSs are automatically initiated when a predeﬁned event occurs; user and target coincide in self-referencing
LBSs, while cross-referencing LBSsmake use of one target location for service-provisioning of another user; the major focus is
on tracking one target’s position in single-target LBSs, while in multi-target LBSs, the focus is rather on interrelating the positions of several targets. 
Integration of proactive and cross-referencing LBSs contribute to our system design when integrating
the IoT, which allows static and dynamic environmental objects to communicate and collaborate with each other. Just as in
other interactive systems, user modeling is a basic consideration in LBS as the services ﬁnally delivered must correspond to
user needs.We have to makesure right from the start whothe users are andwhat kind of services they need. One description
of user modeling could be ‘‘the acquisition or exploitation of explicit, consultable models of either human users of systems or
the computational agents which constitute the system’’ (Csinger, 1995). We are pleased to extend these ‘‘computational
agents’’ to objects in the IoT, since an object could either provide or consume LBS in the form of a ‘‘Web Service’’.
    Location modeling is also a central part of LBS. One static location can be represented either as a geometric coordinate
such as ‘‘4851029.600N, 217040.2 00 E’’, in the World Geodetic System (WGS) (2013), or as a symbolic expression such as
‘‘Champ de Mars, 5 Avenue Anatole France, 75007 Paris’’. The difference stems from the two distinctive models for representing
 space (Hu and Lee, 2004): geometric models that ‘‘treat location and objects as points, areas and volumes within a reference
coordinate system’’ and symbolic models that consider locations as sets and located objects as members of sets, so
that ‘‘interrelationships are established among a set of locations and a set of located objects’’. Geometric models are largely
adopted by GIS applications, while symbolic models are more easily accepted by the general public. Depending on the scenarios 
of applications or the degrees of accuracy, it would be helpful to carry out some combinations or merges of these two
models. For example, a semantic location model was developed by the authors of David et al. (2012), able to create location
hierarchy (belonging to one location and being a boundary point from and into which an entity can leave and enter) and exit
hierarchy automatically without manual intervention. Dynamic location data, in other words spatiotemporal data, could
provide more information (especially in real-time management systems), making modeling and processing of spatiotemporal data hot topics in LBS.



4. Simulator design, implementation  and use

4.1. Simulator design

    In  the ADVICE project, which was a research project devoted to feasibility studies, our role was to propose system
architecture and demonstrate feasibility by a simulator and a mock-up, validating technological aspects. After describing
functionalities and architectural aspects, this section will present simulation design, implementation and use.
    Wedecided to use a Multi-Agent approach implemented in Java using multi-thread technology, such that each active element can run at
its ownpace unless there are tasks that would involve more than one element (synchronization of threads is
possible). This approach aims at integrating elements into a unique framework, whose goal is to simulate the IoT, and at testing communication
and collaboration between the elements.
    Main components of the simulator are: The road is represented as a rectangular area and is made up of several lanes
(35 for the current version), where each lane takes a straight line form. Each lane is divided into a series of squares for
relative location modeling, so that the positions of vehicles and signaling facilities as well as sensors can be found easily.
The squares can also receive horizontal signaling to inform users about the current status of lane allocation, for example
‘‘open to all’’, ‘‘reserved for bus’’ or ‘‘closed to all’’, where the number of squares shows the length of the allocation area.
A top view of the representation is shown in Fig. 6.
    Communication and collaboration among objects complying with IoT (Internet of Objects) simulation is: a set of sensors
is located on the lane to automatically detect the presence of priority vehicles, where each sensor is in charge of only a certain range 
of region and is able to notify the management center to perform operations according to their locations (proactive LBS). 
On the other hand, priority vehicles could send a priority request to the nearest sensor in front, to initiate lane
allocation (reactive LBS). Whena priority vehicle leaves the region, the sensor detects it and notiﬁes the management center,
which gradually sets the allocation back to normal. The sensor is also responsible for delivering information about current

8






                                                                                  Fig. 6. Simulation scenario view.




trafﬁc  status  within   its  range of  region  via displayers  such  as vertical  signaling.  The  information   collected  can  also be presented 
as an embedded  interface   in the  vehicle  on-board   display.
     In order  to use this  simulator   appropriately,   we created  a simulator   environment   designed to  prepare simulation   scenarios and 
assess the  results. Its  main  functionalities    are (Fig. 7):


Scenario editor   in charge  of simulated   area speciﬁcation.
Distribution    of sensors and  vertical  signs  and their   association  to sections  of lanes.
Trafﬁc  generator  based on  priority   and  non-priority    vehicles.
Visualization   tools  allowing   observation  and  a variety  of  usability   and acceptability   tests.







                                                                         Fig. 7. Simulator environment functionalities.

9


    A scenario editing tool completes the simulator. Its goal is to specify simulation parameters such as lane length, number
of lanes, duration of simulation, number of sensors and initial status of lane allocation. This graphic editor tool (Fig. 8) also
includes a sensor editor toolkit able to set sensors at appropriate locations, to adjust sensor parameters such as range of
region in charge, or to test  the inﬂuence of different  placements. All parameters are saved into ‘‘line ﬁle’’ used by the
simulator.
    Vehicles, priority or non-priority, will travel through the area from left to right, with distinctive parameters (speed, initial
time, etc.), strictly respecting signaling of lane allocation throughout the process. A trafﬁc generator tool (Fig. 9) is used to
generate trafﬁc ﬂow, in which there are priority and non-priority vehicles. Also, different parameters can be chosen as well as
possible itinerary preferences. Moreover, this generator tool helps choose how to launch trafﬁc ﬂow, with different time
intervals and densities. Just as for the Scenario editing tool, trafﬁc data are saved in a ‘‘vehicle data ﬁle’’ to be used by the
simulator.
    Prior to simulation, the experimenter creates the simulation scenario with the scenario editing tool (Fig. 8) and indicates
the trafﬁc situation  to be generated using the trafﬁc generator (Fig. 9). During and mainly after simulation, we need to
observe the results in several graphic visualization forms allowing their utilization in usability and acceptability studies.
    We have decided to provide 2 views for visualization of simulation results, namely a 2D or 3D top view and a 3D view
from the interior of the vehicle. The top view is used for a global bird’s eye view of system functioning, and for observing
the behavior of vehicles in different parameter settings of lanes, sensors, etc. The observer can choose the simulation result
ﬁle to load and then watch the animation play. Pause and resume are supported as in other replay applications. Fig. 10 shows
the 2D top view of a scenario in which a bus, represented by a green rectangle, is running alone in a reserved section (brown
area), while other vehicles, represented by black rectangles, are running elsewhere (on general trafﬁc sections in white). In
Fig. 11, a 3D top view is presented, allowing observation of the general trafﬁc scenario.
    The view from the interior of the vehicle (Fig. 12) is used to present either static or dynamic driving situations. In the ﬁrst
case, a static situation interpretation test can be conducted and user behavior observed. In the second case, a dynamic test
presents the driving scene in real time with the corresponding simulated elements and assesses whether user scene interpretation 
and reaction are compatible with temporal. The driver can see the vertical signaling on the roadside as well as the
horizontal signaling on the ground from the front window of the vehicle. Moreover, the surrounding circumstances are also
reﬂected in the vehicle rearview mirrors.












                                                                           Fig. 8. Scenario editing tool.







                                                                              Fig. 9. Trafﬁc generator.

10











                                                                              Fig. 10. 2D top view of visualization.














                                                                               Fig. 11. 3D top view of visualization.















                                                                      Fig. 12. 3D views from the interior of the vehicle.



4.2. Simulator use for capacity  studies and driving  situation  usability  testing


     The goal of  the simulator is to  allow  capacity  studies  and ergonomic  studies  for  acceptability of this  kind  of  approach to
dynamic  lane management.  Several levels of  tests can be produced,  using different   views. Amap   view  using the  global bird’s

11















                                                                    Fig. 13. An acceptability study scenario.


eye view, as shown in Figs. 10 and 11, is used to study capacity behavior to determinewhen static behavior must be used and
when dynamic behavior is appropriate. A subjective view, i.e. a view from the interior of the vehicle (Fig. 12), is used to test
drivers’ behaviors, either static or dynamic.


4.2.1. Capacity studies
    With several simulation situations, we are able to determine working conditions of priority vehicles in relation with general trafﬁc. 
We can observe the time needed to cross the simulated section in dynamic working conditions compared to static
conditions, i.e. compared to time with predeﬁned priority lanes. If this time is considerably more, then the number of private
vehicles and buses is too large to allow dynamic behavior, requesting personal vehicles to alternate between mixed and specialized use of lanes. 
The main reason is that the large number of participating vehicles is incompatible with rapid freeing of
a lane that has become specialized by the arrival of a priority vehicle. In this kind of situation the static operating modemust
be applied (Daganzo and Geroliminis, 2008; Chiabaut et al., 2012).


4.2.2. Usability tests
    A scenario screen shot of the acceptability study is shown in Fig. 13. In the test, a set of photos was produced to simulate
statically different situations. These photos show a multiple lane conﬁguration with insertion of appropriate vertical and
horizontal signaling. The pictures are shown to a driver, letting him/her observe the situation, after which questions are
asked, requesting him/her to choose the appropriate behavior. If signaling is not easy to observe or understand, the driver
may not choose to behave correctly. This static approach allows us to know whether understanding of different trafﬁc signs
is appropriate, but we do not have the sufﬁcient reaction and interpretation times. The tester can take as long as needed to
respond to each situation.
    This ﬁrst test study was conducted by our IFSTTAR partners (Hugot et al., 2015), who studied understandability of appropriate vertical 
and horizontal trafﬁc  signs and road signs. These signs are either static or, in the majority of situations,
dynamic (electronic display signs), according to dynamic lane evolution. Fig. 14 shows several of these signs.
    Internet-based evaluation was conducted for 6 weeks in September 2013, and 187 exploitable answers were collected.
Questions concerned direct sign understanding and their use in situations (Fig. 14). With respect to understanding, signs
#5, 6 8& 9 had a low level of understanding, i.e. 50% while with respect to understanding situations completed by horizontal
signs (roadway integrated lights changing from red to green), understanding increased.













                                                                            Fig. 14. Trafﬁc signs tested.

12
 









                                                                       Fig. 15. In-car embedded interfaces.


    To examine understandability and acceptability in greater depth, we need to study the temporal behavior of drivers. It is
not sufﬁcient to observe appropriate interpretation of driving situations, if the user can take all the time he/she needs to
think about the situation. Rather than creating driving situations by using static photos, our simulation goal is to support
dynamic behavior in which the subjective view during simulation is related to driving speed. The situation corresponding
to that shown in Fig. 15 can be used to conduct dynamic tests. Speed is not the only dynamic property; external vehicle trafﬁc 
can also be taken into account, for instance, to what extent a user adapts him/herself to a more complex situation with the
change in surrounding circumstances such as a car appearing in the rearview mirror and the change in message on the panel
or signaling.


4.3. On-board embedded user interface design and testing

    Weare also currently studying the design of an embedded interface, which will be integrated into the dash-board for passive users 
and active users allowing them to receive information and/or priority requests (as we will describe later on).
    With respect to users identiﬁed in the system vision, the user aspect must be dealt with as soon as possible, by designing
and implementing appropriate human-machine interfaces: as observed, active users (requestors – beneﬁciaries of the system), 
passive users (subjected to the system) and also regulation managers. While for the latter category, regulation managers, 
the User Interface is a classical large-screen control user interface, which is commonly deﬁned,we are concerned with
design and usability studies of in-vehicle user interfaces. For these interfaces, it is essential that this information and these
actions comply with the work context and the corresponding requirements: 
regarding vehicle compatibility with the dual task – driving and managing; in a regulation work station for example, it is efﬁciency which dominates;
when information is displayed outside, it has to be compatible with meteorological constraints of visibility–legibility.

    Therefore, design of these User Interfaces also forms an important part of the system and conditions its acceptability. We
proposed different User Interfaces for different kinds of users with a main constraint: use human participation only when it
is necessary, in order to avoid dual task problems and cognitive overloads. Examples of embedded interfaces, which we
expect to test, are shown in Fig. 15. The GPS, LANE INFOS and the REPORT ACCIDENT entries are open to all users, while
the PRIORITY screen is reserved for active users.
    These embedded user interfaces will be integrated in usability tests in order to study their impact on drivers’ behavior.
The goal is to determine whether this kind of interface is able to increase, functionally and temporally, drivers’ understanding 
and interpretation of corresponding driving situations.


4.4. Mock-up technology validation

    The digital simulator can provide us with much useful information while designing and developing the system, since it
can easily generate different scenarios for comprehensive consideration. However, it is still necessary to conduct a technological 
validation before in-the-ﬁeld deployment. Therefore,we created a preliminary mock-up with a scenario to showwhat
can happen in our simulation study. In this scenario, a vehicle with priority  is detected, after which a section of lane is
reserved and closed to other vehicles during priority vehicle presence.
    Fig. 16 shows an overview of the mock-up: 3 lanes are painted on the cardboard, the reserved section will be found on the
right lane, and a display panel is placed over the cardboard as horizontal signaling. Detection of the vehicle with priority
takes place both at the beginning and at the end of the section: when a vehicle with priority is detected at the entrance,
the display panel will show that the lane is closed to other vehicles, and when the vehicle is detected at the exit, the display
panel will change the signaling, showing that the lane is now open to all vehicles.
    To collect the information ‘‘Priority vehicle detected!’’ and actuate the signaling, we use Arduino cards (Fig. 17). These
cards contain a set of analog/digital input/output pins and several types of data bus (SPI, I2C and RS232), controlled by a

13











                                                                                Fig. 16. Overview of the prototype.












                                                                                         Fig. 17. Arduino card.



microcontroller.   With   the addition   of an  Ethernet  cable, the  data processed by  the microcontroller    can  be transmitted   via a
TCP/IP network. The card  plays the  same role as the  regulator  in our  system.  We also implement   a server to  centralize  management of  
Arduino  cards, and, more  generally,  to centralize   sensor and actuator   information   networks.  The server  can also
provide  application   tools  as an API to  simplify   management  and  use of Arduino   cards.
     With  respect to  signaling,  for simplicity’s   sake, weuse  red  LEDs for ‘‘closed to other  vehicles’’  and green LEDs for ‘‘open to
all’’. To integrate  the LED into  the TCP/IP network  or Web,we   connect  the LEDs to the digital  outputs   of an Arduino  card, and
we use the  REST architecture  with  two  sets of  resources, ‘‘analogs’’  and ‘‘digitals’’,   including  the  pin  numbers.  For example,
we can expect  an output  of a LED status by  using the  HTTP GET method with  the  URI http://ipArdress/digitals/2     if  the LED is
connected to  the digital  pin  2 of the  Arduino  card;  if we  want  to modify  the  status of  the LED, we use the same URI, but  with
the HTTP POST method and a value  (0 or 1)  as parameter. The resource  representations   are available  in the  JSON (JavaScript
Object Notation)   format.
     With  respect to  vehicle detection,we    decide to use a RFID reader, which is able to  read information   from  a RFID tag within
a 10 cm diameter  area, where  the tag is attached  to the  vehicle, as shown  in Fig. 18 (a more  powerful  solution   will  be needed
at the time  of in-the-ﬁeld    deployment).  The RFID readers are pasted at the  back of the  cardboard (Fig. 19).  Given the fact  that
once a  vehicle  is  detected,  the  information    must  be  sent  without   a  request,  we  cannot  use  the  traditional    HTTP query/
response model.  The solution  we  adopted  is that  an  HTTP request is sent  to  the central  server  when  a tag is  detected, then

















                                                                                    Fig. 18. Vehicle and RFID tag.

14


















                                                                                          Fig. 19. RFID reader.



the server  interprets  the  request  and uses aWebSocket  to  send messages (a method  modifying   a LED status for  instance)  to
potential  clients,  in  a synchronous   way.
     We can observe  the change in  signaling  in  Fig. 20. On startup,  a WebSocket connection  is  established  between  the server
and the Arduino  cards. Once the priority   vehicle  is identiﬁed   at the entrance,  API methods  are called to turn  off  the green LED
and turn  on the red LED on the display  panel.  Whenthe   priority   vehicle is detected  at the  exit, the server  sends a message via
WebSocket to  tell  the  Arduino  cards  to execute  methods  that  turn   on the  green LED and turn   off the  red  LED.

















Fig. 20. Scenario (a) initial status, (b) vehicle detected at the beginning, (c) vehicle in the middle of the reserved section, (d) vehicle detected at the end.

15


     Although  the  mock-up  is rough  and the scenario  is simple,  collection  of data, integration   of  objects, transmission   of information  
and dynamic  allocation  are all  involved  and well  supported.  Therefore, wedemonstrate    the feasibility   of our  dynamic
road lane management   system and  will  gradually   add more  functionalities    to the  mock-up  to  complete  the technology   validation  
step  in the  future  work.


5. Conclusions


     In this  paper we  brieﬂy   explained  our view  of the Smart  City in  the context  of transportation   and  citizens’  everyday life  on
which  we are currently   working   (David  et al., 2011, 2012,  2013).We  gave the  main  principles  and  techniques  used and presented a 
precise application  based on the  IoT and LBS. Before in-the-ﬁeld  deployment   of this  kind of  system, it is important   to
validate  it  theoretically   from  technological   and human  acceptability   points  of  view.  For this  reason, we created  a simulator
allowing  us to design  and simulate  different   scenarios of infrastructure   behaviors.We   also use this  simulator  for  user acceptability  studies, 
the  goal of which  is to validate  (or  invalidate)  acceptability   of newdriving    situations   from the  driver’s  point  of
view. In  a static viewwe   tested  the user’s (driver’s)   behavior in  relation  withnew    vertical  and  horizontal  road  signs (Fig. 14).
By connection  between  our simulator   and several  2D and 3D visualization   tools  we are able  to assess dynamic  behavior.We
are also and in particular   able to study,  through  a vertical  (driver’s  top)  view  presentation,  dynamic   driver’s  reactions related
to vertical  and  horizontal   road signs depending  on  the behavior  of  other  vehicles around  the  driver.  Acceptability   studies  of
In-car embedded  interfaces  are also possible.We  also elaborated  a mock-up  of our  dynamic  line  management  system, allowing 
us to  show  its  behavior  based on  actual technologies.
     We also wish  to mention   that,  in the  project, another  study  has been conducted  by  our industrial   partners  with  an  aim to
identifying   the technologies  to be used in  real implementation    of this approach  in the  ﬁeld. CEA-LETI is an industrial  research
lab working   on  ICT solutions.  It  is  currently   studying   a variety  of  sensors and  actuators,  which   will   be industrialized    and
potentially   used in  in-the-ﬁeld   implementation.    LED-based horizontal   signs are  also studied  to be  integrated  into  the  road-way. 
EGIS-Mobility  is a companyworking    in  roadway  construction,  specializing   in newICT-based  technologies  for  road security  and control.  
It  has experience  in  construction   of dynamic  road  lane allocation   solutions,  for  the most  part  less dynamic
than  those presented   in  this  paper,  but  having  operated  for  at  least  8 years near  Grenoble,  where  an  urgent  lane  can  be
dynamically   allocated  to bus  circulation   if  the existing   lanes are  totally  jammed.   These studies are  out  of the  scope of this
paper and  also subject  to  industrial   secrecy.
     After  these mainly  research-  and  evaluation-oriented    studies supported   by the  ADVICE project, we  are currently   preparing a 
more practical   project,  the goal of which   will  be in-the-ﬁeld    implementation   integrating   the  results  of the ADVICE project. 
A contract   for this  ﬁnal   step is currently   being  negotiated.

