1


Temporary uses in contemporary spaces. A European project in Rome    




                                                 ABSTRACT

Temporary uses represent innovative and experimental solutions to give new life to disused facilities and spaces 
while conserving their historical, identity and environmental value. By offering the opportunity to assign new
functions and meanings to abandoned places and create economic and social development, these practices can
play a strategic role in promoting an integrated approach as a starting point for urban regeneration processes.
Based on these assumptions, this paper aims to investigate how temporary uses of disused urban spaces can
interact in a practical sense with formal planning systems and urban policies. To do so, it analyses a European
project implemented in Rome aimed at fostering temporary activities in public space and reactivating several
disused areas by directly involving the local community. The paper proposes a few observations touching on two
issues: firstly, whether the temporary use of disused space can be a practical opportunity to not only re-design
urban space but also establish a new governance model. Secondly, whether such practices can effectively address
the needs and aspirations of citizens, as a precondition for improving quality of life in the city.


Keywords:
Temporary uses
Urban regeneration 
Social innovation
Temporariness
In between dimension  


1.  Introduction                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                         
     The  dynamics at  work  in  the  contemporary  city  spur critical   reflection  
on urban  transformation   processes and the need to  identify         
operational  strategies which  can be  used to  formulate  new  ways of        
interpreting   and formalizing   urban   spaces. Over the   past decades,       
several studies and research projects  have investigated  the  potential        
contribution  of  temporary uses to urban  development in  Europe. The        
temporary character of these transformations allows citizens to use the        
spaces for creative urban living solutions, involving  them in their  city's        
future (Lehtovuori  & Ruoppila,  2012).                                                            
     There are  multiple  reasons why  temporary  uses practices are becoming 
increasingly common. These include the recent economic crisis       
and resulting  need for  recycling  and re-use strategies, concerns over        
preserving architectural   heritage, limited   resources, insurgent  urban        
activism,  and an  ever-growing  awareness of  the importance  of  sustainable  
development.  Furthermore,  technological  changes  and  uncertainty 
in the  labour market give rise to social innovation,  creativity,         
new cultural trends and a host of flexible and transitory practices. These            
significant changes call  for a  multidisciplinary   reflection  on planning         
tools.                                                                                                                
     In  Europe, the  need to  adapt  the landscape and  its structures  to        
social, political  and economic changes and a broad sense of historical        
continuity   have given   rise to   a  conservational  approach to   saving       
heritage and site-specific identity.   Alongside this  trend, the  spread of        
urban re-use practices testifies to an emerging innovative  approach in        
which temporary uses are conceived as a holist, integrated strategy that
enhances the creativity  and  resilience of  the spatial,  social,  environmental 
and economic conditions of contemporary cities.  As a matter of
fact,  temporary  urbanism represents an  alternative  method  of urban
design  and planning  aimed at  activating  a space in  need of transformation 
and  impacting  the  surrounding  socio-economic environment.
Temporary  urbanism is  the temporal  designation  of urban  processes;
the key concepts for this theoretical approach are time and temporality
(Madanipour,  2017). Temporality  reflects the contemporary utilitarian
notion  of time; the fragmentation  of society and, at the  same time, the
need for  experimentation  and  innovation.  Temporary  urbanism  also
includes temporary, informal,  and above all bottom-up practices. These
temporary  uses are performed by the  public, private  and civil society
actors. Temporary  urbanism emphasizes the role of  new actors in the
shaping of  places  (Henneberry, 2017).Temporary  users  are also  the
promoters and, at the same time, beneficiaries of such transformations,
while  the  transformations  themselves have provided  an  impulse  for
more synergies with local  government bodies as well.
Conserving (natural  or  historical)   heritage is  no  longer  the only
node of urban re-use. Temporary uses in  particular  are not  solely an
informal activity  driven  from below  by marginal groups or  urban sub-cultures.  
Overcoming the  idea that  such practices are necessarily occasional or 
random has increasingly led  these uses to be considered a
crucial  element  for processes of urban  and territorial transformation.
The main target of such attention  is disused spaces suited to becoming
urban laboratories for  strategically reinventing specific parts of the city,


2

their role  and the facilities  they host.                                                             
     Over  the past few  years, the  issue of residual  spaces has aroused            
considerable interest and promoted in-depth  theoretical  knowledge of
the subject, leading  to an  abundance of projects  based on temporary         
actions. Small-scale incremental  projects such as temporary  gardens,             
playgrounds, and market places with their collective character pave the             
way  for  social  innovation,   promoting  social  cohesion and  environmental values. 
They support economic activities and the valorisation of         
heritage while  compensating  for  or  counteracting  the weakness and             
rigidity  of formal policies. The act of re-using these spaces is a chance to         
test out  proposed projects,  verifying  their  effectiveness and,  if  users
agree, making them permanent.                                                                           
     Despite  several successful projects,  temporary  use cases in  Italy         
continue to represent valid yet  rare and largely unknown  experiments.       
Over the past few years, however, several initiatives addressed to local       
authorities or active citizens have focused attention on public  property        
and the  possibility  of  its  re-use while  also  promoting  public-private         
partnerships. Recently, measures have been adopted to encourage the       
participation  of local  communities in protecting  and valorisation  local              
areas, fostering the recovery of existing assets. However, this issue calls     
for further  analysis.                                                                                         
     The strategy of temporary  use can be considered an instrument for              
reactivating collective  spaces, a planning goal, and as such it has come      
to play  a strategic role  in  the process of urban  regeneration. Current        
trends reveal  that   urban  regeneration  interventions  have  gradually        
shifted  from  being  place-oriented  to  being  people-oriented  (Marra,              
Barosio, Eynard,  &  Marietta,   2016).  Whereas in  the  first   stage regeneration 
favored the improvement of  spaces, facilities and economic       
aspects, planners now focus on social support and people-oriented policies 
which also include environmental  protection and care initiatives.         
This is achieved  through  more integrated  actions adopting  a  participatory 
framework. Temporary use practices seem to combine these two      
aspects within  an  integrated  and contemporary  approach  (De Smet,             
2013).                                                                                                              
     Based on such reflections, this paper focuses on the theme of temporary use 
and valorisation of disused areas, in particular public spaces,     
in order to investigate the potential and challenges of temporary spaces.           
This study  seeks to develop  a theoretical  interpretation   of  this  phenomenon 
through a critical evaluation of its effects and potential future              
implications.  To  do  so, it  analyses the  EU-funded  project  TUTUR -        
Temporary Uses as a Tool for Urban Regeneration, which aims to develop  
a legal instrument for promoting the temporary use of disused buildings       
and spaces, streamlining associated bureaucratic processes and paving      
the way for new experimental  models. What relationship is established       
between temporary uses and urban regeneration processes?                       
     This is the main question this paper attempts to answer by analysing      
the chosen case study and referencing  other  European examples, the       
potentialities  and   limitations   of  these  practices  and  their possible       
transfer to other contexts.                                                                                
     The findings of the TUTUR project stress the potential of temporary         
uses as a specific type of spatial planning which  can offer  a chance to       
establish a  dialogue  between the  various  public   and  private  stakeholders, 
potentially   offering  effective  economic,  social and  environmental advantages 
to the areas involved.                                                       
                                                                                                                        
2.  Research approach  and  methodology                                                    
                                                                                                                              
     The general aim of this  paper is to explore and interpret  the extent        
to which many current practices of temporary use in Europe might play        
a strategic role in promoting  an integrated approach as a starting point        
for  urban  regeneration. The  specific goals  are to  verify   1.  Whether        
temporary uses of unused city spaces can also have permanent effects       
on the contexts  in which  they  are situated, and  2. Whether  temporal        
and informal  uses succeed in meeting the neglected needs of the community.                                                                                                             
     The paper is  therefore concerned with  the process rather than  the        
results of the  analysis of the case study in Rome.
The main questions address these issues:
1. Whether  experimenting  with   and supporting  temporary  uses can
make planning  more flexible  and  capable of adapting  to the  challenges 
posed by changes currently underway while also contributing
to the  creation of a new governance model.

2. Whether  temporary  uses in public  spaces can succeed in creating
contemporary  places, taking  full  advantage of the  potential  of in-between spaces.
Two  main problems needed to  be addressed to test the  above hypotheses: 
firstly, whether temporary uses of disused spaces represent an
opportunity   to not  only re-design urban  space, but also innovate governance 
more  generally.  Secondly, whether  such  practices can  successfully meet 
the needs and aspirations of citizens, as a prerequisite for
developing policies with  the  efficacy to improve  the quality  of the  environment 
and urban life.
How  can temporary  uses be  integrated  into  long-term  urban  regeneration 
processes? How might we facilitate  the  reactivation  of the
marginal, in-between  spaces that characterise contemporary cities?
These are the main questions this  paper seeks to answer. It  is not
clear whether authorities will  be able to further develop the potential of
such practices in  the future. The TUTUR project in  Rome did not have
an  influence in terms of  long-term change.
To  these ends, a qualitative  research project  was carried  out: the  
analysis of  existing  literature  and  data was  complemented by  direct
observation of the locations and participation in  the meetings organised
as part of the  project in  Rome. During  the research it was possible to
exchange opinions,  information  and knowledge  with  people who  are
involved  in the project. These also provided some useful elements to in-depth 
analyse the ongoing process.
The paper offers some theoretical insights on the issue of temporary
uses and intermediate  spaces while  also attempting  to verify   the hypotheses 
suggested by the theory on the  basis of the outcomes of the
case study.
The findings  were subjected to factual  and interpretative  practices
through which  reality  acquired visibility   (Denzin & Lincoln,  2000: 3).
Secondary data was collected  from a  variety  of sources: literature
reviews,  documents, materials taken  from  dialogues with  social, economic and 
institutional actors involved in  the project, websites, books,
internal   records,  interviews,   institutional   and  administrative   documents, 
EU project  reports, previous  studies in  the field  of  temporary
uses, reviews of relevant literature,  and websites, as well as documents
on  European  examples, decrees and  norms  (Urban   Catalyst, 2003;
Urban   Pioneers,  2007;  Temporiuso,   2009;  Oswalt,   Overmeyer,  &
Misselwitz,  2013;  Tutur Final  Report 2015, Refill  Urbact-Reuse of vacant 
spaces as  driving force  for   innovation   on  local   level,  2016;
Raumlabor, 2018; Decreto ‘Sblocca Italia’ (‘Unlock Italy’ Decree), 2014)
to name just  a few,  with  elements being  added to  compare different
practices on urban re-use. In the first phase, analysis focused on several
interpretations  proposed by the literature on the issue of temporary use.
Subsequently, further   attention  was paid  to  the  concepts of temporariness, 
informality   and social innovation,  understood  respectively as
opportunities, triggers  for  action, and outcomes of  the spread of such
practices.
The study  of  different  cases in Europe seems to confirm   that the
“time”   factor influences the  methods, process and outcomes of the interventions 
under way. Indeed,  the “temporariness”  of such actions is
an important  strategic  variable (Galdini,  2015;  Inti,  2010). This  variable 
is in turn situated  in the so-called in-between dimension, a transitory 
phase between the old  and new intended  use or between a  temporary
and permanent solution.  This  temporal and  spatial dimension
seems to better adapt  to the  fragmented nature  of  the contemporary
city.  In light  of this insight,  the research analysed intermediate spaces,
potential  venues for multiple activities. The second part of the paper

                                                                                                                  2

3
                                                                                                                                                                                        

was concerned with the analysis of the case study, an observation of the     
ways the EU TUTUR project was implemented  in  Rome and a critical         
evaluation  of its  outcomes. The  discussion was based on  social  and       
spatial elements, the legal aspects affecting this case of re-use, relations     
between citizens  and institutions,   social and  economic impact,  difficulties 
and future prospects. The goal was to focus on methods that may     
facilitate the  implementation  of temporary uses, encouraging dialogue        
between the various social stakeholders and institutions  and  fostering        
public  debate  on  the  issue of  planning  and  design.  The  final  part        
highlighted  the critical  aspects brought to the  fore by  this case study.       
The summary of the  results and related  discussion outlined pathways        
for future  inquiry.                                                                                             
                                                                                                                         
3.  Perspectives on  temporary   uses                                                             
                                                                                                                         
     Over  the  past  decade,  temporary  uses have  been  spreading in         
Europe  to   an  unprecedented  degree.  Active   citizenship   practices        
claiming the right to  use and manage communal assets (Arena & Iaione,    
2015; Harvey, 2012)  have been emerging, driven by economic factors        
as well  as the  growing   attention  paid  to  urban  spaces and the  environment 
in  general. Scholars in  various fields  have focused on  the        
issue of temporary use, analysing  the spatial  opportunities  and social        
implications  of  temporary  uses in  urban  areas. The results  of  these       
studies encompass different  political   perspectives and  backgrounds,        
connected to the contexts in which  temporary practices develop or the              
opinions of  those observing them.  However, it  is  possible to  identify        
two  main trends:  (1)  a growing   awareness of the  complexity  of  the        
problem and  its multiple   implications  and (2)  a political   spin on  the        
debate given the  current  historical  moment  characterized by  the acceleration 
of gentrification  processes and austerity policies.                         
     The first suggestion of the complexity of temporary uses can be seen      
in the  fact that  such practices are defined  in multiple   different  ways.       
Lehtovuori and  Ruoppila (2012)  define  temporary uses as “those uses      
that carry  a development-orientation, i.e. carry the capacity and aim to        
explore further potentials of the places they are located in. Hence, they form 
a category between momentary events and permanent (re)development.”    
     This definition  supports the goal of  this research project, that is, to         
acknowledge that  temporary  uses have the  potential  to  give  rise  to        
permanent actions as well. The uncertainty but also possibility of  these       
practices is highlighted in the definition  by Honeck (2015) “which labels       
a spatial use carried out for a limited time on a vacant land with no foreseeable 
development demands” […] “Temporary use may develop to a        
‘longer-term use of a higher urban quality’” (BMVBS, BBR, 2008: 107).        
     Whether or not a space manages to change from a waiting space into     
a potentiality  place is closely related  to the  action of  the various subjects 
involved  in organizing  and managing the  project, as well  as the        
various operational levels. It is also connected to the type of space, their      
morphology  and  potential  use  value.  These aspects complicate  the        
launch of structured  and well-accepted processes.                                        
     Some scholars have granted special relevance to temporariness as a     
value or,  vice versa, a limitation   of  these practices. The definition  of        
temporary uses as secondary uses clarifies  these two  different  interpretations.                                                                                                        
     Supporters of the former  theory, such as Haydn and Temel (2006),        
claim that “temporary uses are those that are planned to be non-permanent 
from the outset. We understand the idea of temporariness to be determined 
not by the duration  of use: temporary uses are those that seek to derive      
unique qualities from the idea  of temporariness”. Bishop and Williams               
(2012) share this idea, emphasising that the characteristics and value of      
temporary use are generated precisely by the  fact that  the actors promoting such use, 
users, developers, and planners, intentionally   frame        
the use as transient.                                                                                        
     Another  relevant aspect which  is not  easy to implement  is the  relationship between 
temporary  uses and master plans: these small-scale changes are conceived as the 
first step in carrying out lasting changes.       
Thus, these practices are most effective when used in conjunction with        
long term  planning efforts (Lydon &  Garcia, 2015: 2). Some benefits of
temporary   uses  include   highlighting     creativity,    encouraging  entrepreneurship, 
providing   incentives to  property  owners  to  maintain
their  properties, and supporting  environmentally  sustainable development (Blumner, 2006:8). 
Regarding the latter hypothesis, a few authors
argue that these practices are temporary, marginal and alternative  (De
Silvey & Edensor, 2012; Hou, 2010),  without  any chance of becoming
primary  (Nemeth  &  Lanhorst,  2014).  The  concept of  temporariness
requires  critical  evaluation: on one hand,  it favours  informal,  flexible,
transitory   and sometimes even illegal  practices involving   the various
stakeholders  and promoting   local  participation,   providing   rapid  responses to residents' demands. 
On  the  other  hand, it   highlights  the
difficulties  in  implementing   such practices if  there  is  a lack  of  continuity in funding, 
cooperation,  interaction  with  stakeholders and  institutions. 
The case study analysed here falls  under this  critical  category.  
What seems to be  the driving   force of  temporary  uses is often
informality  as a response to the unmet needs of the community. Actions
based on  informality   and temporariness are a  way of  testing out  the
functionality,   relative  innovativeness of and consensus enjoyed by the
practices in question before the supply  of innovative  services becomes
established. Such projects offer a way of evaluating  the effects of such
services and their repercussions on structural aspects as well as cultural
and social capital, thus promoting personal re-use if the project is found
to work  well  (Berruti &  Palestino, 2014).
The second main trend in the critical  evaluation of  temporary uses,
which  is inevitably connected to the first, is the gradual politicisation  of
discourse. As the case study below highlights, procedural complexities
and lack of flexibility   in  regularity  norms often prevent practices from
continuing   over  time.  The  perceived  value  of   temporary  uses lies
mainly   in their  ability   to  promote urban  regeneration processes. The
results  are  not   guaranteed,  due  to   the  risks   associated with   institutionalisation  itself. 
Concerning the politicisation  of  the debate, the
analysis by Honeck (2015)  dwells  on changing conditions and  administrative structures in spatial, 
economic and legal terms in  reference to
temporary uses. These trends can be summarised as “from  informally
tolerated to a formally  sanctioned activity.” Temporary uses are often regarded as “motors  of  gentrification”
and  “fields  of   self-exploitation.”
Whereas in the  1990s the innovative  use of empty  areas in cities  undergoing crisis 
such as Berlin and Leipzig was unanimously celebrated,
today such initiatives  meet with  scepticism. This attitude is  partly due
to  the increase in   public  protests against  the recapitalisation   of the
areas used in  an informal  way  or  the  socially exclusive  character of
many  temporary uses that address the middle  class or, more recently,
the creative class, thus excluding the poorest members of society. Many
authors initially   took  a positive stance towards urban  development in
investigating  their  object  of study  (Ferguson, 2014;  Lydon &  Garcia,
2015;  Oswalt  et  al.,  2013),  and  this  celebratory  position  has been
analysed by  several critical   papers over  the past  few years  (Ferreri,
2015;  LaFrombois, 2015;  Spataro,  2016).  Today,  the  gentrification
processes associated with re-use practices are  one of  the most  widespread  side effects  
linked  to  urban  regeneration initiatives.   Authors
such as Colomb  (2012),  Tonkiss (2013)  or Spataro  (2016)  have emphasised the 
problematic role temporary  re-use plays in the context of
neoliberal  urban  policies,  with  intermediate   uses being exploited  as
drivers  for growth   or as pioneering  gentrification   instruments.  Local
politicians  and real estate investors have often  used this aspect to increase 
economic profitability  (Colomb, 2012; Overmeyer, 2007).
Some other critical   insights  focus on  political  instability   and  administrative 
discontinuity,  together  with   the conflict   that  may  arise
between owners and tenants, or  between the institutions  and community,  
thus  preventing  the  practices from   continuing  and  being  fully
implemented  and, in  so doing, unravelling  the  benefits they had  produced  thus far.  
On  the contrary,   several examples of temporary  use
manage to achieve consensus by permanently integrating into the areas
in   which  they  are situated  (Oswalt  et  al.,  2013),  highlighting   their
potential  ability  to  meet the  new demand for  a social city.  An  aspect
                                                                                                                    3

4


which is problematic  but rarely  studied in  the literature  on temporary              
uses concerns the location of temporary spaces. As they are place-based,  
what areas are potentially more suitable for temporary uses? According       
to Lehtovuori and Ruoppila (2012), almost any urban location can have       
the potential for  some kind of temporary  use. Adopting the distinction         
made by  Urban Pioneers (2007),  they  refer  to  central  and marginal
spaces leading to two  different  kinds of  temporary use. In  central lo-         
cations, the  question is  how  to  intensify  use even  further  while   re-
specting practical  and legal  limitations.   These aspects make new in-              
vestment difficult.   In  marginal  areas, the question  is instead how  to        
invite  the first  users to an unknown  or vacant  area. To create a com-        
prehensive analytic framework of  temporary uses, the authors propose       
to take  into  account  a third   spatial  condition,  namely  “areas losing        
significance”. A great amount  of recent literature  face the issue of un-              
used or under-used areas object of the next paragraph.                                
                                                                                                                         
4.  The in-between  dimension   of  temporary   spaces                                  
                                                                                                                         
     The challenging  role assigned to temporary  uses re-focuses our at-       
tention on  the issue of temporary  space. Temporary uses can be con-        
sidered a valuable tool in developing challenging locations, giving  new        
function and meaning to obsolete spaces/buildings. Considered inactive      
spaces without any identity or functional ties to the city, in  reality these        
are also spaces offering opportunities  and  resources for urban  devel-        
opment. Starting  from the  late 1980s, in-between  areas have become       
the subject of  several studies and subsequent categorisations. Trancik       
(1986)  defined urban  voids  as lost spaces, critical  spaces, unable to        
contribute positively  to  their surroundings;  Cameron (2003) re-valued              
them by using the term vacant land, and identifying  them as a “natural        
dynamic component of every city that is constantly evolving.”  Residual        
spaces often appear as terrain vagues, islands within the city deprived of     
any effective  integration  and lying   outside urban  dynamics (De  Solà       
Morales, 1996).                                                                                                
     Richardson (2015)   reversed this  interpretation   to  frame residual        
spaces as one of  the  outcomes  of  globalisation  processes and con-        
sequences of post-Fordism. Voids have the potential to become full  of
meaning, functions, opportunities,  and  identity.  Over the  past twenty              
years, several analyses have been carried out and a series of definitions           
have been created  to  define the  abandonment,  decay and often  de-             
gradation and neglect that characterise certain spaces of contemporary            
cities, including  but  not  limited  to  liminal space, in-between space, ne-          
glected space and intermediate spaces (Banerjee (2001), Clement (2005),        
De Girolamo, 2013).                                                                                             
     They appear to be waiting spaces in a transitional phase between old           
and new intended uses. They can be public or private  spaces and they            
are areas that present both risks and potential,  sites of degradation or              
fertile  grounds for innovation.  In  the contemporary  city,  these spaces            
often become places through  practices  of  use, and develop  informal              
economies and self-organised services, thereby catalysing new forms of
cities (Oswalt,  2006).  As fragments of  the  city,  they act  as nodes of              
change and can offer  solutions  where  traditional  planning  strategies        
have failed (De Smet, 2013).                                                                           
     Through  re-use practices, intermediate spaces play a strategic role        
in the architectural,  social, and  environmental field.  They promote  an             
integrated approach as a starting point for urban regeneration processes     
(Galdini, 2017).  From an  architectural  perspective, abandoned spaces            
that undergo  some sort of  ‘reinterpretation’  and reassessment change      
their use and function, maintaining  their  original  image or changing it         
to better connect  to the contemporary  world.  In this  case, the project        
also involves an effort  of mediation  and connection between past and        
future.                                                                                                              
     In relation  to temporary use in general and the specific case study in      
particular, this  paper aims to show that  disused spaces provide an op-             
portunity  in  terms of  environmental  sustainability  (Lombardi,  2008),        
making it  possible to regain possession of the “territory   as a common        
good” (Magnaghi, 2012)  and build or  change a living environment.             
In  the  (open)  public  spaces of  the contemporary  city,   collective
subjects are engaging in informal  and temporary practices with  special
attention  to social  aspects, sharing and cooperation. This  new ‘active
citizenship’   pursues the goal  of  reinventing  a city,  re-building   it  ac-
cording  to the citizenry's needs and aspirations (Harvey, 2012).

5.  The European  TUTUR pilot   project

Some of the above-mentioned  theoretical insights  on the  issues of
temporary  uses and  intermediate  spaces can help to  analyse and in-
terpret the European pilot project TUTUR(Temporary Uses as a Tool for
Urban  Regeneration),  which   is  part  of  a  wider   programme  called
URBACT.
The TUTUR project  also involved  the Municipalities   of Bremen in
Germany,  Alba  Iulia  in  Romania and  Rome in  Italy,   and its  overall
purpose was to  introduce  the method  of  temporary use in  urban  re-
generation to the  cities participating   in the  network. The  main objec-
tives were sustainability  and  inclusiveness: the project  promotes eco-
nomic and  environmental development  by reusing urban  voids in  the
city  with  the involvement  of  public administrations,  local  inhabitants
and stakeholders. As the Tutur  report highlights,  one of the  program's
main objectives was to transfer the practice and methodology coined by
the temporary  use agency of Bremen, Zwischen Zeit Zentrale (ZZZ), to
other European cities. In this  program, the municipality   of Bremen es-
tablished a  collaboration with  an  NGO to work  at different  scales and
with   different users on 50  properties in  its territory.   The German city
played  the role of  an “experience provider”  (Elisei, 2014).
This policy   cross-cuts other  planning  instruments  and  has three
main  objectives: 1. networking  people;  2. Focusing on unused/under-
used places to foster socio-economic, cultural initiatives;  3. connecting
input coming from the bottom  up with top-down  requirements. The key
words of  Bremen's ZZZ methods are the same ones considered central
for the analysis of the case study in Rome, key principles that could  be
transferred  to other  projects. This  agency's objectives can be listed as
follows:
Cultural:  support of  cultural  and creative projects.
Economical:  reducing operating  costs for vacant properties.
Spatial:  activation  of vacancies, especially in urban redevelopment areas
Social: fostering  citizen participation.
Organisational:     supporting   coordination    and   decision-making
processes between  the  various  departments of  the  German  City
Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial
Development  (BBSR) implementing these new approaches in man-
agement routines.
Cooperative:   Testing new  forms  of  coordinated  cooperation  be-
tween the private  sector and public actors.
The ZZZ was a local  project,  but as a  pilot  project  of the  Federal
Institute  for  Research on Building,  (2009–2012)  it  also tested a  new
approach for  urban  and  social development  for  other  cities  as well
(Elisei, 2014).
The ZZZ  agency played multiple   innovative  roles in  terms  of ap-
proach and content.
The approach of ZZZ was project-orientated and experimental, and
it  did  not receive any  EU-funding. Its aim  was “to  ‘wake up’ sleeping,
vacant buildings  and areas, both public  and private  owned, by  estab-
lishing  temporary uses there and thus upgrading the real estate and its
surrounding  districts.”   ZZZ has  activated many  buildings  on  a  tem-
porary   basis and  supports the  City   Administration   in  its  long-term
urban planning  plans.
The Bremen examples testify to the extent to which temporary  uses
can contribute  to  both  economic development and  social cohesion in
the neighbourhoods  involved  in  the project.  (Mages, 2017).  The pri-
mary  investment of TUTUR was thus made in the periphery of Bremen,




                                                                                                                    4


5


an approach that  suggested a concrete medium and long-term  vision.             
The project provides,  for example, affordable  spaces for start-ups and             
job opportunities  for young  people and migrants. Regarding methods,             
the Local Support  Group composed of  representatives of social,  political, 
cultural  and  economic institutions  played a leading  role and  information 
was used to promote the project and develop public relations.            
Bremen practices and methodology have represented the starting point        
for implementing  temporary use policies and projects in Alba Iulia  and             
Rome, above all following a good governance and partnership-oriented             
approach.                                                                                                              

6.  The TUTUR project  in  Rome                                                                          
                                                                                                                         
     The choice of this  case study reflects the research aim of exploring        
the potential and limitations of temporary uses through a project which,        
although guided and promoted by local administrations, is based on the       
active involvement   of  local  residents. Implemented  in  collaboration         
with   the  Urban   Transformation  Department,   Urban  Planning   and             
Implementation  Office  and Municipio   III  of  Rome, TUTUR aimed to         
develop a  regulatory  instrument  to  allow  for  and  promote  the temporary 
use of disused buildings, paving  the way for  new experimentational models.
                                                                                                   
     The selected area, located north-east of Rome, is highly  populated              
(approximately   250,000   inhabitants)   and   characterized  by   social        
housing facilities and  an uneven infrastructure system. The project  involved citizens,  
institutions   and  associations already present  in  this area.
     The administration's  main objective  was to formulate  new policies              
and planning tools aiming at enabling the temporary use of urban voids,      
integrating these uses within a more comprehensive urban regeneration      
process. After a massive growth  trend leading  to  sprawl, the  city  administration's goal  
was to avoid expansion and safeguard green-fields.        
To this end, temporality   was considered the key strategy for  reaching        
this goal.                                                                                                                
     Rome's city  plan  does not  include  any  specific strategy  for  temporary use; 
temporary  uses are part of the  informal  realm and  policy        
does not support the short timeframes of these kinds of activities. Often,      
the city  administration  has tolerated  and eventually  formalized  these       
uses through specific agreements. Since the 1990s, new initiatives have      
been launched in peripheral areas of Bremen involving local projects for      
economic and social  development. However, temporary  uses are still         
regarded as an exception rather  than an integral  part  of planning,  an        
issue that the TUTUR project sought to address directly. It  also looked        
for ways  and instruments to  deal with   both public  and  private  properties. 
Rome's participation in  TUTUR was aimed at activating unused              
and under-used physical  capital  as leverage  for  the  creation of  employment, 
economic  and social  development opportunities.  The  final        
goal of the project  was to foster urban regeneration processes in these       
peripheral areas of the city. TUTUR was launched in 2014 and, over its       
16months  of  activity,  it  dealt  with  three  issues in different  areas of        
Municipio  III:                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                         
1.  Temporary uses or  in-between uses, while waiting for  major transformation  
     projects and as a way  to take action  before degradation        
     worsens. The project also aimed to turn the Viadotto dei  Presidenti,       
     one of  the  areas involved in  the  project  into  a bicycle  path.  The        
     Viadotto  dei Presidenti, extends along a  path defined by  the 1962        
     urban development plan that was intended to have served as the hub     
     for  a high-capacity  road  system. This  viaduct  (today  a  forgotten              
     space) is an infrastructure located in the North- Eastern periphery of       
     Rome. Construction work on it  was abandoned more than ten years       
     ago and has never been completed. The idea was to  revitalize  and       
     transform  these unused spaces into a cycling  and pedestrian  path        
     and reimagining the neglected spaces under the viaduct, revitalizing       
     them with  leisure and cultural  activities. 
                                                        
2.  Temporary uses to create a micro-fabric of neighbourhoods services:      
in the  case of Montesacro, there are many abandoned or under-used
areas which could provide  social and cultural as well  as productive
services to  the neighbourhood.  The theatre in  the school is  an example of 
functionality  reassignment of a cultural container. The idea
was to build a network of local services in the abandoned facilities of
the Montesacro area with  the involvement  of the local  community.

3.  Temporary uses for  green area  maintenance. The Viale  Adriatico
market  had the goal  of stimulating  social interaction   in the  urban
network, focusing on the quality of the environment  and services for citizens.
The Agency in  Rome is composed of  the city  administration   (the
Planning Department)  and  a local  support  group (local  stakeholders
from the  public and private sectors as well as civil society and informal
associations) that  will  match  the available  sites with  potential  users,
several associations working in the  area, and the G124, a group of  six
architects under the leadership of  the famous architect Renzo Piano.
The activities  planned for  improving  stakeholders' participation on
the issue of temporary use included:

1. Creating a local  support group;
2.  Organizing workshops and  visits with   private  associations to map the unused spaces;
3.  Grouping participants  (100 people) according to  their  interests;
4. Organizing meeting,  debates, urban walks, and talks with  experts
5. Selecting the areas on the basis of local needs (Elisei, 2014).

The selected areas are located in the middle-class neighbourhood of
Montesacro and  they are  all unused spaces, but their  local  socio-economic 
context  is very different.
In  the  area  of  the  Viadotto  dei  Presidenti  the  aim  was  the  re-activation 
of the forgotten spaces to test the potential of temporary uses
in the regeneration  of the neighbourhood.

The project's value lies in its symbolic  power to transform this  area
through a participatory  process. The idea of temporary use attracted the
interest  of not  only residents but  also institutions  and various interest
groups. Over the span of the  project, the space hosted several cultural
activities   such as  concerts,  theatre  performances, children's  games,
debates and a photography exhibition.  Through  temporary use of this
area, the  space underneath the viaduct  was reactivated by  creating a
connection   between  the   neighbourhoods  separated  by   the   infrastructure,  
i.e. putting  in  a children's  playground  and positioning  two
cargo containers, one hosting a bicycle workshop and the other a small
meeting room for  local associations.
Another  planned   action   involves  re-using   the   Viale  Adriatico
Market,  a plan developed in collaboration  with  a few associations and
universities  from  the  territory.  The  Market,  which  dates back to  the
mid-20th  century,  had been showing  signs of  obsolescence. The programme 
of  activities intended  to revitalize  it included  maintaining  the
booths  and green areas, painting the surfaces and restoring street furniture,  
all  of  which  were carried  out  together with   the various  local
associations.
The third  and final intervention  developed by TUTUR took place at
the  Don Bosco school. In the  basement, a disused theatre and dining
hall  were regenerated for use in cultural activities addressed not only to
students but to  all the  citizens of Municipio   III.  This project provided
local  associations with  an  opportunity  to  take part  by  managing the
activities  addressed to residents outside of school hours.
One of  the first  outcomes of  this  project was  a map of  the  voids
existing  in the  selected territory,  created by means of the  City-Hound
social network. City_Hound on line platform  created by T-Spoon Studio
(Environment  Architecture)  helped to identify  70 abandoned spaces in
Rome's third district  and, at the same time, to map the answer of these
forgotten  spaces (Henneberry, 2017: 239).
A census of unused spaces was then carried out along with a survey
of local needs. Problematic areas were identified  as well as the spaces

                                                                                                                    5

6


most suitable for temporary use experimentation. A brief  handbook for        
citizens and local  administration  bodies was drawn  up  to outline  the        
procedural rules  for re-use proposals. These different  temporary  uses       
actions revitalised the  areas in question, creating a common  language       
with  the public  space around them.  The project triggered  civic  collaboration 
around  temporary   use  with    foreign   scientists  from   the        
University of Arkansas and the Eutropian association cooperating in an        
attempt to  define shared objectives  for  a diverse model  of urban  development.                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                         
7.  Results and  discussion                                                                              
                                                                                                                         
     The  TUTUR project   in  Rome provides  a  great  deal  of  food  for        
thought in terms of  critically  evaluating temporary  uses, specifically in        
relation to the local dimension of  the project as well as the Italian legal              
framework and international  dimension. The analysis of this case study       
does seem to confirm the hypotheses outlined above, at least in part.           
     The Rome-based project demonstrates that  public  administrations        
can support and incentivise local bottom-up initiatives in the attempt to         
integrate them into the planning  process. It also highlights that, here as       
in Bremen, the  local support  group plays a  central role  in  organizing              
participatory  activities.  Indeed, the TUTUR report defines this  process       
as a win-win  procedure that promotes  inclusiveness among the actors       
involved and fosters trust  in the institutions.                                                   
     The TUTUR methodology  puts the community  at the  centre of the        
planning phase and decision-making  process. However, this aspect of        
city  governance  is   still   quite   new  in   relation   to   such  practices.       
Municipalities  have yet  to  develop structures and  frameworks  which        
can enable them to most effectively  take advantage of the potential  of        
temporary use. In several cases, such initiatives are still led by citizens              
and creative  entrepreneurs. This aspect calls  for  a renovation  of  the        
culture governing urban changes, a culture which currently still justifies        
the imposition  of permanent and formal  uses.                                               
     Regarding practical  outcomes,  the TUTUR project  provided  solutions 
to  the  residents' needs for rapid  measures. It  also raised a  few        
questions.                                                                                                        
     Can a viaduct, an abandoned market, and a school turn into devices       
with the  capacity to regenerate an entire neighbourhood?                            
     The  obvious answer  is that  these temporary  actions  can be  considered 
catalysts for a  broader project,  a chance to offer  and test out         
possible options.  Although  the  area under  the viaduct  had  been inaccessible for years, 
at the end of the project it was an open space where   
people of every  age and kind  can meet to  take part  in  numerous activities,  
ranging  from  children's  games, recycling  and  re-use laboratories, 
exhibitions and  concerts.                                                                     
     As Mages (2017) has pointed out, “experimenting with temporary uses         
within the framework of TUTUR allowed the city to open up its properties to 
new uses while involving inhabitants.”                                                             
     The interest of this  project would  appear to lie more in  its methods       
than in its actual results. The main outcomes were 1. The activation of a      
shared trajectory  towards  the re-arrangement  of  these areas; 2. The        
organisation of participatory  activities: the different  stakeholders in the       
project engaged in  workshops, focus groups, and  “urban  walks”. The        
project entailed  the  broad involvement  of  local  groups, suggesting a        
reflection on the role played by an active citizenry as well as the various      
organisations and groups in the area and their ability  to  take an active             
role and use such spaces as a field of experimentation for different types     
of spatiality.                                                                                                      
     Antonio  T., one of the social actors involved in the project,  stressed       
that the TUTUR activities  have revealed “the existence, to his great surprise, 
of a wide group of people living in the neighborhood who are interested 
in cooperating and are willing to put their energies into the construction of 
space for the community.”                                                                                 
     Over the past few years, the number  of stakeholders has increased.      
We can observe that residents are asking for greater involvement in city      
governance to take part in the development of their city. This point calls       
into  question  the way  cities  are currently   being governed. The  temporary 
use of vacant  places can represent the first  step to facilitate   a
shift   in    governance,   granting   increasing   room    to   city-making.
Regarding the results of the TUTUR project, the point worth stressing is
the potential  of  temporary uses, that is,  the fact that  they  represent a
specific type of spatial planning. This type of planning  effectively offers
a chance to establish a dialogue between the various public and private
stakeholders, potentially   offering  decisive  economic,  social  and environmental 
advantages to the areas involved.  Roman City Councillor
Caudo, the Planning Commissioner of Rome, stated in an interview that
TUTUR was an attempt to “give remaining fragments back to the city, with
the active involvement of  the residents. In Europe, re-use practices are
changing urban contexts and their spaces creating relations, social practices
and employment.”
The analysis of the case study reveals strong as well as weak points.
The outcomes of the  TUTUR project support the  potential  connection
with  the temporariness of practices and their ability  to provide prompt
solutions to the specific needs expressed by the community, although in
this specific case these solutions have been limited  to  the duration  of
the project. Patti  (Patti and Polyak,  2015)
one of  the project  coordinators,  explained  that  in  her  vision  the
concept of temporary does not necessarily imply  short term. Rather, it
refers “to the transitional and experimental character of such practices. The
particular value of these practices lies in the fact that they represent a chance
to activate uses in the in-between period, seizing the opportunities created by
non-use”. An evaluation of  the project, however,  reveals that although
temporariness has  favored  these transitory   practices,  involving   the
various  stakeholders  and promoting   local  participation,   it   has also
highlighted  the difficulties  entailed  in implementing  such practices.
These users seldom have the  financial  means and opportunity   to
realize their  projects in conventional  ways. The uncertain condition  of
the  waiting   space often compels  these users to  become “temporary
users”, frequently forced to  “move”  when the site they  are using is re-integrated in 
the prevailing spatial cycle. TUTUR in Rome highlighted a
series of weaknesses tied to the specific context as well as more general
information  that  speaks to temporary re-use and its implementation in
other  European countries as well.  If,  as several such examples show,
temporary  uses can trigger  medium- and long-term  processes and become urban 
catalysts (Oswalt et al.,  2013), in  this respect the TUTUR
case has fallen short of expectations.
In  this case, the temporary project has not given rise to a long-term
path. Once the initiative   was over, the area was abandoned once again
and came  to  serve as  a shelter  for  the  homeless. The  bureaucratic
processes also remained unchanged because new political leaders took over.
This conclusion leads us to some considerations, which refer also to
the document  summarising the TUTUR project. On one hand, it  is imperative 
that  continuity  be ensured in  the dialogue between local  administrations 
and local  actors regardless of political   membership. On
the other  hand, there  is an urgent  need to provide  a uniform  and coherent 
set of regulations for temporary  uses. It is clear that  these temporary 
projects in Rome must be inserted within  a wider,  general plan
that   can  guarantee  continuity   in   supporting   initiatives, allocating
funding and implementing  actions or, conversely, in changing direction
when  temporary outcomes do not meet the  recipients' expectations.
This paper shows how knowledge and interaction  contribute  to the
transfer of  knowledge in  international  cooperation projects. However,
the goal of transferring  the Bremen model to Rome faced a number of
obstacles. Namely, the rigidity of processes, unsustainable rent levels in
these unused areas (indeed, they remain  empty to  this  day), and  the
absence of a legal framework thanks to which it would be possible to
a cooperate with  external partners. In  the case of Bremen, for  example,
the  positive  outcomes of  the  Urbact  programme  are mainly due to
flexible   rules  in  dealing  with   temporary  initiatives.   Such flexibility
implies  less transparency, however, and Italian bureaucracy in contrast
is not  tolerant of  lower levels of transparency.



                                                                                                                    6

7


     As Patti  highlighted,  “Although  spontaneous civic uses took place in     
public-owned spaces in Rome, we did not have any regulatory frameworks  
for such actions. Rome is more rigidly regulated than Bremen in terms of     
public procurement, security and zoning. Rome and Bremen are very dif-     
ferent in term  of political  framework what is  possible to learn from the        
German experience is the central role that collaboration with regional and    
national stakeholder have played”.                                                                       
     Despite multiple success stories, this specific case study confirms the     
limitations of practices when they come face to face with administrative        
and financial  discontinuity,  lack of  regulations or  norms that lack  the              
flexibility  to  adapt to ongoing changes.                                                         
     Furthermore,  the analysis of  several cases in Europe reveals other       
points of weaknesses, mainly connected with the contextual conditions
in which re-use agencies and institutional stakeholders find themselves        
working.  In general, a lack  of economic  resources often leads partici-             
pants to create instruments to ensure the financial sustainability  of the         
projects. Italy  displays  a certain  delay  in  adopting new  policies  and             
cultural trends  on any level, and  this is particularly   true of regulatory              
frameworks. The issues of public assets and the re-use of disused assets    
have only  recently  been included  on  the  agenda of  the  various ad-              
ministrations.  In many  cases, temporary uses in Italy  are still  seen as            
experimental forms  not  yet  officially  included  in  urban  planning.  In              
particular, the case of Rome also shows that the city plan lacks specific
regulations governing  the  occupation of  temporary  sites in  which  to              
launch re-use  initiatives  at  zero  cost, for   example. With  regards  to        
Rome, some measures have been adopted to improve this situation. One    
such measure is Resolution 219 of  2014, which  approved the  criteria        
and methods  for  freely  loaning  or  leasing properties  owned  by  the              
municipality  to  be  used for projects  offering  cultural,  social  and en-        
trepreneurial activities. This resolution provides for the implementation         
of re-use practices to being about a dynamic transformation of existing
assets through the direct involvement  of citizens and  the practical ap-        
plication of subsidiarity  principles. This resolution  represented the first
important  phase for  the concession of municipally-owned   properties.              
Through public  tenders, they  can be entrusted  to  associations, social       
cooperatives, and foundations with social missions, but also public and/       
or private  enterprises. In line  with  the provisions of  article  24 of Law
164/2014,  the so-called “Unlock Italy”  (Sblocca Italia)  decree, citizens       
are given a broader role in shared management, including the re-use or
regeneration of real estate and unused areas. Through this  resolution,        
the Municipality   of Rome adopted an  integrated approach capable of              
fostering cultural growth, economic development and social cohesion in       
                                                                                                                              
the city and  in the suburbs in  particular.  The question at this point  is,        
will  temporary uses become an ordinary practice in the next few years?            
Will  there be a series of measures capable of affecting urban planning             
instruments, effects of climate change, public-private partnerships, and        
                                                                                                                         
the integration  of initiatives  aimed at  both physical rehabilitation   and             
satisfying social needs?                                                                                        
     The  hope is  that  we  can  move from  good  Italian   practices, un-        
                                                                                                                              
doubtedly valid  but still  not widespread, to  real policy  in this  area.                
                                                                                                                       
8.  Conclusions                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                        
     The analysis  of numerous projects  carried  out in  Europe and  our             
case study leads us to reflect on  the role  of the  spatial, temporal  and        
                                                                                                                         
planning dimension of the various practices being enacted in the spaces           
of the contemporary city. Temporary uses, in particular, bring  the issue       
of in-between spaces to the foreground (Hertzberger, 2009; Van Heick,             
                                                                                                                              
2008). In  relation   to such  practices, in-between  spaces represent an       
intermediate  zone that  favours  encounters and interactions  between              
“different  worlds  and distinct  spaces” like  a  “residue which  tends to              
approach something ‘beyond itself’”  (Cerrocchi, 2008).                                 
                                                                                                                              
     Thanks to  the transformable and  temporary character of  their  ele-             
ments, spaces become flexible and capable of adapting  to spatial  and       
functional changes over time.                                                                               
                                                                                                                              
     From  a multidisciplinary    point  of  view,  in-between spaces offer a       
spatial and social perspective to  connect time and space with  people's
experiences. As the same time, they can be seen as fields of mediation
between needs and aspirations. Moreover, these dimensions express the
potential  overlapping   of  different   human  activities   and  the  multi-
functionality   of  individual   spaces containing different   functions  and
meanings.

In  contemporary  architecture,   the “in-between”   conceptual  prin-
ciple introduced by Van Eyck has been extensively used as a theoretical
basis for planning and to  produce new theories, practices and policies.
Observing and analysing  the temporary  operational  practices and
methods  originating  from  such ideas  and discourse, we  can uncover
interesting  results that often  cut across the projects' initial  intentions:

1.  They promote new governance models with  variable, flexible,  stra-
tegic  and cooperative institutional  and territorial   features;
2.  They make citizens not only passive recipients of services but rather
active subjects and promoters of  collective action  (Cognetti, 2014)
who  invoke the right  to own  the city  (Lefebvre, 1968);
3.  They  reinforce the  idea  that  urban planning   is a  tool  capable of
triggering  virtuous  processes of transformation   that  may  also be
sustainable if they are based not only on material resources but also
foster greater equality, more social justice and better quality  of life.
Although they maybe viewed as transitory and isolated projects, the
incremental  changes involved in  these practices have the potential  to
form  part  of  a  broader, integrated  urban  regeneration  strategy that
negotiates between past, present and future development.

The in-between city  with  its  complex and indeterminate  character
may  come to  represent an  exciting  field  into   which  future  research might  delve.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8

