1

A systematic analysis of multimodal transport systems with road space distribution and responsive bus service                                                                                     T




              ABSTRACT

 A smart  design of transport systems involves efficient  use and allocation of the limited  urban  road
 capacity in  the multimodal  environment.  This paper intends to understand the  system-wide effect
 of dividing  the road space to the private  and public transport  modes and how the public transport
 service provider  responds to  the  space changes. To this end,  the bimodal  dynamic  user  equilibrium
 is  formulated  for  separated road  space. The  Macroscopic Fundamental  Diagram  (MFD)
 model  is employed  to depict  the  dynamics of  the automobile  traffic  for  its  state-dependent feature,
 its  inclusion  of  hypercongestion,  and  its  advantage of  capturing   network  topology.  The
 delay of  a bus trip  depends on the running  speed which  is in  turn  affected by bus lane  capacity
 and  ridership.   Within   the  proposed bimodal   framework,   the  steady-state  equilibrium   traffic
 characteristics  and  the  optimal  bus  fare  and  service frequency   are analytically   derived.   The
 counter-intuitive   properties of  traffic  condition,  modal  split, and behavior  of bus operator  in the
 hypercongestion  are identified.   To understand  the  interaction  between  the transport  authority
 (for  system benefit  maximization)  and  the bus operator  (for  its  own benefit  maximization),   we
 examine how  the  bus operator  responds to space changes and how  the system benefit  is  influenced
 with  the  road space allocation.  With  responsive  bus service, the condition,   under  which
 expanding  bus lane  capacity  is beneficial  to  the  system as a  whole,  has been  analytically   established.
 Then  the  model  is  applied  to  the  dynamic  framework   where  the  space allocation
 changes with varying  demand  and demand-responsive bus service. We compare the optimal  bus
 services under  different  economic  objectives, evaluate  the  system performance  of the  bimodal
 network,  and explore  the dynamic  space allocation  strategy for  the  sake of social welfare  maximization.

Keywords: 
Multimodal system
Dedicated bus lane 
Responsive transit service
Macroscopic fundamental diagram
Dynamic user equilibrium 


1.  Introduction

      City  centers  nowadays   are experiencing    significant    amount   of daily   commuting,    causing  traffic   congestion   to  notoriously    spread  in
urban  road   networks.    Constructing    new  infrastructure      is expensive,   while    implementing     road  pricing    is  practically    difficult     due  to
user acceptability.     Considerable   efforts  have  been  devoted  to  smart  planning   and  allocation    of the  existing   road  space among  different
modes,  e.g.,  private    cars,  buses,  etc.  The  idea   of  “dedicated    bus  lane”   is  proposed   and  implemented     in   many  cities   worldwide     to




2


promote public  transport and divert  car users to higher-occupied modes. The dedicated lanes give buses absolute priority  without
being interrupted by the traffic  flow  from other  lanes. This is particularly helpful  in the case of congestion where buses can pass the
queues without experiencing significant delays. In practice, however, it may not be always possible to make one or more such lane(s)
available everywhere. Also it  is  uneconomical to keep the  same proportion of  dedicated lanes in  peak and non-peak periods (see
Viegas and Lu, 2001 for a synthesis analysis). Therefore, the optimal design of dedicated bus lanes requires efficient distribution  of
the road capacity over both  spatial and temporal horizons.
     Attempts have been made to include  different elements into  the design of the dedicated lanes. For example, Basso et al. (2011)
took into consideration mode choice, bus frequency, vehicle size, spacing optimization, and Tirachini and Hensher (2011) examined
the effect of  combining  dedicated lanes with  different   fare-collecting schemes in the  isolated bus  system. While the  factors that
contributed to  the delays of a bus trip  are modelled  in detail,  neither of  the models captures the multimodal  traffic  dynamics and
allows for  a  time-varying  road  space distribution   scheme. With  the  developments of  advanced technologies and  reductions in
hardware costs, the real-time traffic signal controls give rise to the flexible dedicated lane design in different time  periods during the
day. Viegas and Lu (2001, 2004) and Eichler and Daganzo (2006) proposed and evaluated the intermittent  bus lane signal scheme.
But the interplays among dedicated lane, bus service operation, and traffic dynamics are not considered. In a similar  manner, Guler
and Menendez (2015), Guler et al. (2016) and He et al. (2016, 2017) introduced and analyzed pre-signals to provide a bypass of the
car queues for buses in a mixed environment.
     The works  by  Daganzo et al.  (2012)  and Gonzales and Daganzo (2012)  provided  an alternative  approach  for  analyzing the
relationship between  land use and traffic  congestion. These works  linked the  Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (MFD)  that  describes
the traffic  dynamics  with  various features  of transport  infrastructures,  and enabled the  development of  integrated  infrastructure
planning and transport operation strategies. The macroscopic traffic models are recently studied extensively, while the MFD
with dynamic  features is empirically observed by Geroliminis  and Daganzo (2008), relating traffic  flow  (veh/hr)  and traffic  density
(veh/km)  at the level of an urban region. An interested reader can refer to, e.g., Mariotte et al. (2017), Saeedmanesh and Geroliminis
(2017), Zhong et al. (2017), Loder et al. (2017), and Alsalhi et al. (2018) for reviews of recent developments in MFD. In contrast with
other models of traffic congestion, e.g., the widely-used link performance function developed by the US Bureau of Public Roads (BPR,
1964) where  congestion is assumed to  depend only  on the  current  demand without  any  memory  for the  level  of congestion  at
previous times, the MFD captures the state-dependent hypercongestion where flow decreases as density increases beyond a critical
value of density. Such treatment is found to be consistent with the physics of traffic congestion at network level, and it allows for the
tractable modeling  of intra-day  traffic  dynamics. As the  MFD is jointly  influenced  by  the topological  characteristics of a  network
(other properties include traffic  signals, multimodality   etc., see in Daganzo and Geroliminis, 2008; Leclercq and Geroliminis, 2013;
Saberi et al., 2014a, 2014b; Mariotte et al., 2017; Leclercq et al., 2017; Zockaie et al., 2018), congestion dynamics can be connected
to the road  space allocation between cars and public  transport, and other  operational characteristics.  For example, under the framework
of MFD, Tsekeris and Geroliminis  (2013) studied  the optimal  selection of city  size without  considering multiple  transportation modes.
Zheng and Geroliminis (2013) analyzed the optimal space distribution of  road space to different modes and its impact
on congestion dynamics. The latter study  shares common interests with this  paper, but a challenging  extension is to integrate  bus
operator’s reaction strategies into the analysis.
     Few studies in the literature  have integrated the bus service optimization into  the interaction  among multiple  travel modes with
considering the properties of traffic flow.  For example, Geroliminis et al. (2014) and Chiabaut et al. (2014) introduced the passenger
macroscopic fundamental diagram (p-MFD) to analyze the flow interactions from different travel modes, but the characteristics of the
bus operation, e.g., bus fares and service frequencies, are not  assumed as exogenously given. Li et al. (2012)  and Tirachini  et  al.
(2014) studied  the  optimal  bus frequency and  fare when  buses share the same road  with  cars, and  Verbas et al.  (2015,  2016)
investigated the frequency setting in particular. However, none of these studies considered the effect of road capacity changes. In the
context of road capacity  expansion, Zhang et al. (2014, 2016)  showed that transit  operators with  different  objectives respond distinctly
to the expansion of road capacity. They found that  the transit service may deteriorate and users of both modes get worse-off
after the road expansion. The implementation of dedicated bus lane has invasive impact on the road capacity shared by the bus mode.
It is not necessarily true that the bus service will be more attractive; instead, the dedicated lane can lead to counter-productive result.
This makes it intriguing to examine how the optimal space distribution should take into account the effect of bus service adjustments.
     The optimal public  transit operation and policy issues have been extensively studied in the single mode context. The seminal work
by Mohring (1972) identified  that the optimal  bus frequency for welfare maximization is proportional to  the ridership. This approach
has been subsequently extended to the multimodal systems which jointly  optimizes service frequency of public  transport and other
variables (e.g., bus size and fares in Basso and Jara-Díaz, 2012; road capacity, bus frequency and fare in Zhang et al., 2014, 2016).
While most of the previous studies treat the bus running speed as an exogenous parameter, the congestion effect is often overlooked.
In fact, the congestion induced by the frequent presence of buses and patronage slows down bus traffic and causes delays at bus stops
when the demand is high. This aspect has been captured by a microeconomic model proposed by Ahn (2009), who discussed on the
congestion interaction  between the cars and buses when sharing  the same road capacity. Tirachini   and Hensher (2011)  then developed
a steady-state model to calculate bus delays through  a detailed analysis of  the formation  of bus queues at stops; yet they
assume the demand for bus is not influenced by the service quality. Recent works by Geroliminis et al. (2014) and Loder et al. (2017)
developed the three-dimension Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (3D-MFD) for representing the congestion dynamics in a bi-modal
network where cars and buses share the same space. The space-meanflow or speed of vehicles (or passengers) is a function of both car
and bus accumulation, with different  degree of influence in the network performance (one additional bus has a larger effect in speed
reduction compared to  a car). The authors provided  a tool  for  evaluating network  performance when different  buses serve in the
network,  from  both  vehicular  and passenger point  of  view.  Most  of  the aforementioned  studies either  regard  mode choice  as

                                                                                                      209

3

exogenous or ignore the effect of land-use properties. While in practice, on one hand travelers can change their mode choices on the
demand side given the service level of all the alternative modes, and on the other, the transport authority can modify  the road space
distribution  to different  modes on the supply side which influences the choice of the travelers. A systematic approach is required to
reflect these interactions.
     Motivated by the discussion above, this paper proposes a macroscopic framework for integrated modeling and optimization of the
multimodal urban transport  infrastructure capacity management and operations. The MFD-based system dynamic model is combined
with the classic equilibrium-based model, aiming to present an approach that is not only consistent with the physics of traffic but also
capable of identifying  analytical  characteristics of  multimodal  interactions.  Under such framework,  the dynamic user equilibrium
with separated road space is formulated and the system-wide effects of the road space distribution is examined in a driving  and bus
two-mode system. The mode choice model and dynamic user equilibrium  are integrated within   the MFD dynamics, reflecting  both
vehicle and passenger dynamics of an urban area. In particular, the choice of bus depends decisively on the running speed of the buses
which is affected by the bus lane capacity and the travel demand. The optimal bus fare and service frequency are firstly recognized for
given space allocation in the steady state. Then we examine how the bus operator responds to space changes and how the system cost
is influenced by the road space allocation. The model is then applied to a dynamic framework  where the space distribution  changes
with the varying  demand. Through numerical analysis, optimal  bus operation strategies are investigated, the service adjustments at
peak and off-peak periods are revealed, and the optimal  space allocation strategy with  responsive bus service is explored.
     The reminder of this  paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formulates the dynamic user equilibrium with  MFD representation.
Section 3 analyzes the optimal bus service for given road space separation in the steady state. Section 4 examines the system-wide
effects of road space allocation with  responsive bus service. Section 5 explores the optimal bus service and space allocation in  the
dynamic framework  via a comprehensive numerical case study. Conclusions are given in the last section.


2.  Model  framework

     Consider a downtown area where the total road capacity is divided for  private cars and buses. The total length of available travel
lane in the network is denoted by L (km). Let   denote the fraction of the total length  assigned for dedicated bus lanes, and 0 <  < 1.
We assume that    is  continuously adjustable  and thus the  ensuing analysis is relevant  in  the whole  range of   .  Due to  practical
feasibility, the change of space allocation should not appear too frequently on the urban road. We consider it is indeed manageable to
give one or  more lanes for  buses in  a fraction  of  roads in  the network  during  the  peak period.  In  other words,  some lanes are
designated as bus only during the peak period, while  after the  rush hours, other vehicles can use these lanes as well.
     Denote D (t) the total travel demand (the number of travelers departing for a trip) at time t . Weassume every trip has the identical
length l , which can be estimated with historical data. This distance of “trip length” can be a part of the whole trip  (cross-region trips)
or an entire trip  that originates and ends in the targeted region. Empirical  analysis (see in Geroliminis and Daganzo, 2008) revealed
that the value appeals to be stable with  moderate fluctuations.
     Travelers choose between two alternative travel modes, i.e., car and bus (represented by subscripts ‘a’ and ‘b’ respectively), based
on their generalized travel costs. We will elaborate the formulation of  the travel cost in the later text. Let xa (t) and xb (t) respectively
represent the demand for car and bus (the resulting  modal split)  at time t , where
                                                                                                                                                            (1)


2.1. Driving mode

     The congestion of the car traffic  in the concerned area is considered homogeneously distributed over space and exhibits an MFD
with low scatter. Note that it  is not difficult  to extend our formulation to networks with  congestion heterogeneity, e.g. by partitioning
such network into regions of the same congestion patterns (see Saeedmanesh and Geroliminis, 2016). Denote na the car accumulation
(number of cars in the  system), ka the car traffic density  (number of vehicles in  unit  length of road),  and then

                                                                                                                                                                       (2)

     Since the average running speed va of all the vehicles in the area decreases with the traffic density ka, it hence decreases with the
accumulation na and increases with the capacity allocated for  cars, i.e.,

                                                                                                                                    (3)

     The production  (vehicle kilometers  traveled per unit  time)  of the system is
                                                                                                                                                           (4)

and the outflow  (rate at which  vehicles reach their  destination) of the  system is

  
                                                                                                                                               (5)

     At  the network level,  the dynamics of the  car traffic  are captured by the differential  equation  of the mass conservation:

                                                                                                      210

4




                                                      Fig. 1. The traffic flow model for car traffic.


                                                                                                                                                                                                       (6)
     Considering the  complexity of  the problem,  which is established in  the literature,  we introduce  the linear/hyperbolic   MFD (as
shown in Fig. 1)  to characterize the dynamics  of car traffic.  The benefit  of such a simplified  MFD model is twofold.  As it  appears,
either the speed or the production  is in the linear  form hence it  can ease the algebra and maintain the analytical tractability   of the
model. More widely,  this model  can nicely reflect  the general monotonicity  properties of MFDs identified  from  empirical evidence
(e.g., Geroliminis  and Daganzo, 2008). This implies  that  the major  results of subsequent analysis (except the absolute solutions),
related to the monotonicity properties of MFDs, can be generalized to other settings. Similar simplified forms of MFDs have been used
in other  analytical studies, such as Daganzo (2007), Haddad et  al. (2013),  Arnott  (2013), Liu  and Geroliminis  (2016), Yang et al.
(2017), and Lamott  and Geroliminis (2017).
     Mathematically,  the speed-density relationship is given  by:

                                                                                                                                                          (7)
where, and represent the critical density, jam density, and critical speed respectively. The critical parameters offer important
information  for  traffic  management, as a network becomes oversaturated and hypercongestion forms when the  critical  values are
exceeded. Specifically, where traffic density ka is smaller than  the critical  density kc, the traffic  speed va is greater than the critical
speed , and the traffic condition here is referred  to as the ‘uncongested regime’. Where exceeds ,  falls below  , and it is
referred to as the ‘hypercongested regime’. When ka approaches the jam density kj , va approaches zero, i.e., the ‘gridlock’ occurs. The
speed-density function defined  in  Eq. (7)  is continuous  but  non-differentiable  at the  critical  density.  The traffic   speed va monotonically
decreases with the density ka, with a kink  at.
     Substituting  Eqs. (2) and (7)  into  (4)  and with  some manipulations, we  have the following  traffic   production as a function  of
traffic  density:

                                                                                                                                                                                          (8)
where  , representing the car accumulation at the critical density. Eq. (8) prescripts that in the uncongested regime, the
traffic production quadratically increases with ka, and reaches the maximum pam ax = nc vc where ka = kc . The maximum coincides
with that  of the hypercongested regime where ka approaches kc. When ka exceeds kc, pa decreases with ka and approaches zero when
ka reaches jam density. The production-density  function,  similar  to  the speed-density function, is  thus continuous  but non-differentiable at.
     The generalized travel  cost of the car user who enters the system at time is:
                                                                                                                                                              (9)
where  a is the monetary cost of the car user, is the value of in-vehicle travel time, and tta is the travel time by car. tta is calculated by
trip  length  over speed, i.e. , where is the instantaneous car  accumulation at  time . While  dynamic
conditions might influence  the accuracy of instantaneous estimation of travel time, such an approach is considered for its analytical
tractability  (errors are not  expected to be more than 10%, see Yildirimoglu  and Geroliminis,  2013 or Liu  and Geroliminis,  2016).

2.2. Bus mode

     With  dedicated bus lanes, we assume that the bus traffic is independent of the car traffic. The average speed of buses is captured
by:
                                                                                                                                                                   (10)
     The first  term on  the RHS of Eq. (10) is  the free-flow  speed of buses and is assumed as a constant. The second term is the
product  of the  instantaneous demand and  the  factor (  )  determined  by the  road  space allocation. Eq.  (10)  captures the


                                                                                                      211

5

relationship  among bus speed, demand for  bus, and road  space allocation. 1 For a given  space allocation,  Eq. (10)  is a  linear
approximation of the relationship  between bus speed and travel demand. The bus speed decreases when more people choose the bus
mode, because longer dwelling time is needed at each bus stop for boarding  and alighting  when the ridership  is higher.
     For a  given demand xb, more  space allocated for bus  mode means that the  demand can be more  spread spatially and  that  a
particular bus can be less delayed by boarding and alighting at each bus stop. Thus, the factor (  ) represents the marginal effect of
travel demand on bus speed depending on the space allocation. With more space allocated for buses, the marginal effect diminishes,
so that   decreases with . To ensure a strictly positive bus running speed for any demand, we assume a positive
bus running speed at the minimum  of    and the  maximum of .
     Wemeasure the generalized travel cost of a bus rider who enters the system at time by the sum of bus fare, in-vehicle travel time
cost, and waiting time  cost at bus stops:
                                                                                                                                                      (11)
where is the bus fare, ttb is the in-vehicle travel time by bus, is the value of in-vehicle travel time, is the waiting time, and  is
the value of waiting time. Given the trip length and average speed, the in-vehicle travel time by bus is. The average
waiting  time for  a bus is approximated  by the  half  of the headway,  which is  an accurate estimation  if buses run at  schedule (by
definition headway is the inverse of frequency). Both the bus fare and the service frequency are decision variables for the
bus operator, and they are both adjustable in response to the change in road space allocation. Throughout the analysis of this paper, it
is assumed that there is no bus bunching and that the combination of bus vehicle size and service frequency is large enough to carry
all the travelers waiting on the bus stop, following many other analytical  studies aiming at high-level multimodal  problems, e.g., Ahn
(2009), Tirachini  and Hensher (2011), and Zhang et al.  (2014, 2016). 
     It is noteworthy that  an implicit relationship may exist between the space allocation and the bus service accessibility. As more space
allocated to dedicated bus lanes, a denser bus service network  can be developed with  more bus stops and in  broader areas. Such
development leads to different operations of the transit system which entails detailed engineering design at lower-level (e.g. bus stop redesign).
Compared to the adjustments of service frequency and ticket price which are more flexible, this treatment is not trivial and it
may cause issues that lose the advantage of the macroscopic approach. Given that our intention in this paper is to focus on the higher-level
problem and that the current model is already highly complex, we treat the access cost as exogeneous and thus omit this term in Eq.
(11). In future studies, the quantification of this term can be carried out based on empirical data and feeds into the modeling framework.

2.3. Dynamic user equilibrium

     The above described traffic dynamics of both modes rely on the number of vehicles/passengers entering each system, which is in
turn driven by the instantaneous modal split. At  any given time point, a total of trips generate in the system and split into two
groups that feed in the two  modes as instantaneous demand/inflow, denoted by  respectively. Travelers make mode
choice based on the generalized travel costs of the two modes, which  are both time-dependent and flow-dependent.
     By assuming deterministic  mode choice, the equilibrium  modal split  at time is pinned  down by
                                                                                                                                                    (12)
where, representing the minimum travel cost between alternatives. The equilibrium  condition  
includes both  interior  and  boundary equilibria.   Where both  modes are used, the  interior  user  equilibrium  is  reached when  the
generalized travel costs of the used modes are equal, i.e. Where the boundary equilibrium prevails, no one chooses the
mode with the  larger travel cost, i.e., with. The above condition serves as the basis for the
subsequent equilibrium analysis in either  static or dynamic  context.3

2.4. System-wide welfare and cost measurements

     Wenowdefined   the welfare measurements concerned in this paper. From the bus operator’s perspective, the profit (TBP) is part of
the fare box revenue that outweighs  the operational expenses:
                                                                                                                                                                                     (13)
where  represents the operational cost associated with the service frequency. We assume the constant marginal operational
cost for each bus movement, and the bus operator’s capital and operation expenses can be captured by, in which 
denotes the capital cost (presumably fixed in the short run) and characterizes the marginal operational cost (associated with each


  1 To simplify the algebra, the headway of buses is not involved in this formulation. However, the headway effect can be partially captured by the
endogenous relationship between the service frequency and the demand.
  2 Where boarding feasibility is an issue, it can be readily incorporated into the current framework by adding a demand-driven disutility term in the
bus generalized travel cost to reflect the boarding impedance and/or on-board comfort in Zheng and Geroliminis (2013) and de Palma et al. (2017).
  3 The proposed bimodal equilibrium framework does not include the total demand elasticity towards the equilibrium cost, namely departure time
shifts and the induced travels are not incorporated. Recent research works such as Arnott and Yan (2000), Zhang et al. (2016), Liu and Geroliminis
(2016), and Lamott and Geroliminis (2017) shed lights on modelling and integrating these factors.

                                                                                                      212

6

movement). Similar linear  operational cost function  has been adopted in related literature  such as Ahn (2009) and Basso and Jara-
Díaz (2012). Since the service frequency is adjustable over time, the  operational cost function  is also time-dependent.
     With  regard to users, the total  travel cost of all  the users can be calculated by
                                                                                                                                                                                      (14)
     From the system’s point of  view, the  total system cost (deadweight loss, TSC) is the sum of operators’ and users’ losses:
                                                                                                                                                                 (15)
     where  the construction  and maintenance costs associated with  the change in  road space distribution   are excluded from  consideration.
     Given homogeneous travel preference, the total system cost (TSC) is an equal but opposite measure of the net economic benefit
(NEB, sum of producer’s  surplus and consumers’ surplus)  for  the system, and maximizing   NEB is equivalent  to minimizing   TSC
(Varian, 1992).

3.  Properties  of the  stationary   equilibrium

     Utilizing  the system described in the last section, we now look into properties of the static equilibrium  where the bimodal system
reaches the steady state. We focus on the equilibrium individual travel cost and modal split properties for given road space allocation
and bus service parameters.
     In terms of car traffic, the steady state is reached when the marginal change in traffic accumulation is constant, i.e.,
where inflow equals outflow. According to Eq. (6) wehave the following relationship among inflow (demand) xa, traffic
accumulation na, and traffic  speed va:

                                                                                                                                                                                (16)
     With  the steady state condition  Eq. (16),  we rewrite  the car traffic  speed defined in  Eq. (7) in  terms of  demand xa in the  two
regimes of the MFD:

                                                                                                                                                                                  (17)
and the traffic  accumulation na in terms of  xa:

                                                                                                                                                      (18)
for which an explicit derivation  is provided in Appendix A. Note that the steady state of traffic accumulation in the proposed model is
state-dependent, with respect to the critical density, whereas most existing works yields a single analytical solution. Nevertheless, the
derivation of  Eq. (18) gets inspiration  from several studies in this  direction such as the one by Daganzo et al. (2012).
     In Eqs. (17) and (18), va and na are given by implicit functions defined in each regime/branch  of the MFD – when the underlying
car traffic  is  in  the  uncongested regime the  first  formula  prevails,  and  the other  one
otherwise. For simplicity, we refer  to the MFD regime by the range of na in the subsequent analysis. Based on Eqs. (17) and (18), we
examine the marginal effects of xa on na and va and obtain the following  lemma:
Lemma 1..  When the concerning bimodal system reaches the steady state,
     
     The proof  of  Lemma 1  is straightforward   from  Eqs. (17) and  (18)  and is  thus omitted.  This  lemma reflects the  steady-state
relationship between inflow and car accumulation na (or  speed), and signifies the comparison between any two  equilibrium
states. Where the traffic  is  in  the uncongested regime ,  the equilibrium   state with   larger car  inflow  has the  larger
accumulation and lower  speed. With  regard to  two equilibrium   states in the  hypercongested regime (nc < na    nj),  the  one with
larger inflow  has the  lower accumulation  and higher  speed. The effects are distinct  in  different  traffic  conditions.  However, it  is
noteworthy that the effects are in line with  the relationship between outflow Oa and na (or va), as the steady-state condition primarily
requires outflow Oa equals inflow xa. Daganzo (2007) established the steady-state (equilibrium) behavior of traffic outflow – outflow
increases with accumulation in  the uncongested regime and decreases in hypercongestion. Therefore, the steady-state relationship
described in Lemma1 is consistent with the general properties of traffic flow  models. As the advancement from the results of Daganzo
(2007), Lemma focuses on the inflow rate (rather than exit rate) which is more directly linked  with the modal split, and includes the
effect of flow  not only  on accumulation but  also on speed.

                                                                                                      213

7


      It  is  noteworthy     that  the  speed-density    function    defined   in   Eq. (7)   is  not  differentiable     at  the  critical    density   kc.  Thus,  none   of
functions is differentiable at. The partial   derivatives    of  and   with  respect   to  are  defined   in  line
with   the  left  limit    of  functions    and  when   approaches   . The  resulting       and     are discontinuous     at  the
boundary    of  the   two   regimes   of  the   MFD.   This  property     prevails   in   many   aspects   of  stationary    equilibrium      analysis.   Since   the
boundary    traffic    condition    between    uncongested   and   hypercongested     regimes   (or   how   does  traffic    condition    transmit     from   one
regime  to  another)   of the  MFD  is primarily     debatable   and is  out of  the  scope of  this  paper,  the  properties   of  the  stationary   equilibrium
are examined    respectively    for  the  two   regimes.
      To  investigate   the   properties   of  an  interior    bimodal   equilibrium     in   the  steady  state,  we  assume  both   modes  are  utilized   and  the
equilibrium     is reached   where
                                                                                                                                                    (19)
      The underlying     assumptions   for the  interior    equilibrium     are specified   in  the Appendix    B. With  D  denoting   the  total  demand   for  the
two   modes   in   a  time   unit    in   the  steady    state,  the   equilibrium      mode   share   of   car  is   determined     by  the   solution    of   equation
, and


                                                                                                                                                                  (20)
      For  given   and   the   equilibrium     mode   split    and   can  be  uniquely    determined    in  either   the   uncongested   regime
 or  the  hypercongested    regime .  The proof   is provided    in  the  Appendix   B. As  such,  the car  usage   can be
regarded  as a function    of   and    , i.e . Taking  partial   derivatives    of the  two  sides  of Eq.  (19)  with   respect  to ,
and    ,  and  with    some  manipulations,     we   obtain   the   marginal    effects  of     and      on    respectively    (an   explicit    derivation    is
provided   in  Appendix    C):

              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (23)
where


Proposition     1..   In  steady state,  the marginal   effects  of  f ,   b , and     on the  equilibrium   car  usage satisfy

                                                                                                                                                                                                (24)
if and  only  if  Condition   (25)   or  (26)  is  valid:
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (25)
                                                                                                                             (26)
Proof..   Clearly,     
                              , where     is  defined   as a decreasing   function    of    , and     . We thus  have
                                                                                                                                                                                               (27)
      Substituting    into  Eqs.  (21)(22)(23),     we  have       


                                                                                                                     214

8

                                                                                                                                                    (29)
     Eqs. (28) and (29)  are simultaneously valid  if and only  if
                   


     Condition (25)  in Proposition 1 shows that when the car traffic is in the uncongested regime, the mode share of car increases if the
service level of the alternative decreases, e.g. service frequency drops, bus fare goes up, or bus lane shrinks. Similar result applies to
the case where car travel time is characterized by a general function as in Zhang et al. (2014). However, since the congestion effect in
the bus mode is not captured, Zhang et al. (2014) can be viewed as a special case of this paper where the car travel time is a function
increases with traffic  volume and decreases with road capacity (consistent with  the uncongested regime of the MFD).
     When the car traffic  condition is on the right  branch of the MFD (hypercongested regime), higher inflow/outflow   corresponds to
higher speed of car traffic (shown in Lemma 1 (ii)).  While on the bus side, the traffic speed decreases with the mode share of bus. As
the consequence, increasing bus frequency or reducing fare can increase bus ridership only if the marginal effect of modal split on bus
speed outweighs its effect on car speed. The effect of the road capacity allocation, both va and vb increase with parameter (refer  to
the Proof of Proposition 1). It  follows that  only if  the marginal effect of the space fraction is large enough on bus speed to offset the
effect on car traffic, enlarging bus lane space can improve bus ridership. Zhang et al. (2016) proved that transit ridership and service
quality may not move in tandem as in Mohring’s original  model (in Mohring,  1972) by considering the effects of road expansion and
imperfect substitutes. Condition (26)  in Proposition 1  shows that neither improving  bus service nor providing  more space for buses
can necessarily increase the bus ridership even if the two modes are perfect substitutes.

4.  The profit-maximizing     bus service  with  road  space separation

     Section 3 establishes the effects of bus service and road space allocation  on traffic  condition  and equilibrium   modal split.  The
frequency and fare are both decision variables of the bus operator and are both adjustable in  response to the road space allocation.
The operator’s decision  depends on its  goal.  This section  considers the bus  operator’s decision  aiming  for  profit-maximization,
treating the  space allocation as exogeneous. We investigate the optimal bus frequency  and fare under  a given space allocation   .
According to the definition   in Eq. (13),  the profit  of the bus operator (BP) within   a unit time  in  the steady state is
                                                                                                                                                                               (30)
     First-order conditions  for the  optimal frequency  and fare (f  ,   b) are:
                                                                                                                                                                                        (32)
     Eq. (31) prescribes that the marginal revenue from increasing frequency balances the marginal increase in cost. Eq. (32) dictates
that the marginal  revenue from adjusting the fare is zero. The Hessian matrix of the  optimization  problem is negative semi-definite
                                                                                               
under Condition  (57) derived  in  Appendix D. Denote  and   the  optimal  frequency and fare when  the car traffic   is in  the uncongested 
regime, and   and    the optimal  frequency  and fare  when the  car traffic   is in  hypercongestion. We  then have  the
following  proposition:
Proposition  2..  Under a specific road space allocation ( , 1  ) , the profit-maximizing bus frequency and fare satisfy:
     
     (iii)  for  the same.
Proof. The results in  and  can be derived by substituting  Eqs. (21) and (22) into Eqs. (31) and (32), and (iii)   follows from  (i)
and (ii).
     Note that  these relations do not provide explicit  expressions for   and   since the modal split depends on the service frequency

                                                                                                      215

9

and fare. Nevertheless, these intermediate results have the following implications. Firstly, it  is shown that the profit-maximizing  bus
service frequency replicates the “square root  principle”.  The “square root  principle”  in  the classic public  transport literature  (e.g.,
Mohring, 1972;  Jansson, 1984) dictates that the  first-best service frequency is proportional  to  the square root  of the ridership  for
social welfare-maximization.  It leads to scale economies of public  transport service when both  users’ and operator’s costs are considered. 
The optimization  of  bus service considered in Proposition  2 does not  directly  include the  users’ costs into the  objective,
however, the operator’s profit  is driven by the modal  split which  implicitly   relies on the users’ cost. Therefore, Proposition 2 shows
that when mode choice is available  the profit-maximizing  bus service also exhibits increasing returns  to scale.
     Proposition 2(iii)  compares the profit-maximizing service frequency and fare for the two regimes of the MFDof the car traffic. The
speeds of cars are not comparable in different regimes of  the MFD ( in uncongested regime and  in hypercongestion).
                                                                                                                                                                    u         h
Nevertheless, both bus running speed vb and ridership xb can be equal in the formulas for  , or. When this happens,
                                                                                                                                                                              u      h
it yields identical  service frequency for the two regimes  and higher fare for the uncongested regime. This is because
the optimal frequency only depends on ridership, and the optimal fare is where the marginal revenue from adjusting  the fare is zero,
 According to Eq. (22), the loss in ridership is less in the uncongested regime when the fare is marginally increased, i.e.,
                   Therefore, the profit  margin  is larger in  the uncongested regime than in hypercongestion.
  

5.  The system-wide  effect  of  road space allocation   and  Pareto-improving    situation

     Section 4 establishes the profit-maximizing  bus fare and service frequency for  given road space allocation. In  practice the allocation 
of road space is usually decided by the transport authority at the higher level. There typically exists conflict in the objectives of
public authority  and private corporation. To unveil the interaction  between the transport authority and bus operator in the context of
road space separation, we consider a transport authority concerned with the total social cost controls the space distribution, whereas
a profit-driven bus service operator determines the service frequency and ticket price. We examine the effect of road space allocation
on bus operator’s profit  and  how system cost changes with  the allocation.  The Pareto-improving  condition  is then  explored with
which expanding the bus lane results in  bus profit  increase and system cost reduction at the same time (the win-win  situation).
Proposition   3..  Under the bus service frequency and fare established in Proposition 2, the bus operator’s profit BP increases with the
proportion of road space distributed to bus lanes under Condition (25) or (26), otherwise BP decreases with .
Proof.. The effect of a marginal  change in space fraction can be evaluated by taking the total derivative of the profit  function  in Eq.
(30) with  respect to   :
                                                                                                                          (33)
     From Eqs. (31) and (32),  we have
                                                                                                                                                                                  (35)
     Substituting  Eqs. (34) and (35) into  Eq. (33) yields

                                                                                              (36)
     Therefore, BP increases with    when   xa      is negative, i.e., under  Condition (25)  or (26).□
     Proposition 3 shows that the marginal profit of bus operation associated with marginal bus lane capacity is proportional to the bus
fare  b , and its change direction is consistent with the  marginal bus ridership   xb     .
     We now look  into  the system cost. According to the definition  given  in Eq. (15), the  system cost (SC) within a unit time is
                                                                                                                      (37)
     Accordingly,  the marginal  effect of road space allocation on the  system cost can be calculated by
                                                                                                                                                    (38)

                                                                                                      216

10

                                                                                                                                       (39)
     Eq. (38) follows  from Eq. (36). The first  term of Eq. (38) captures the change of total travel cost of all travelers combining  direct
and indirect  impacts.  The change of  space allocation directly   leads to change in  the  lane kilometers  available  for  cars – hence
influencing  the properties of  the MFD and the  traffic  speed, captured by  va     . At  the same time, the change of  space allocation
reshapes the equilibrium modal split and indirectly influences the speed. The second term of Eq. (38) represents the change in the bus
operator’s profit.
     Eq. (39) is obtained by substituting Eqs. (23) and (36) into Eq. (38). Eq. (39) implies that the change of SC is driven by the change
of equilibrium  mode share, or dxa d  , which  is in  turn governed by  the bus operator’s response to the space change.
     Zhang et  al.  (2014,  2016) have  shown how  the  guideway transit  operator  reacts to  the change of  the  road capacity.  In  an
analogous manner, we now investigate the adjustment when the bus operator faces the change in road capacity distribution. Denote
 and  the adjusting rate of frequency and fare  with respect to the space fraction respectively. Given Eqs. (31), (32)  and
(57), we have

                                                                                                                                                                        (41)
     Substituting  Eqs. (21), (22) and (23)  into  Eqs. (40) and (41), one obtains
                                                                                                                                            (42)
     Eq. (42)  captures the change of  modal split  under  the combined impact  of  space allocation and bus service adjustments. 
Apparently, Eq. (42) implies that expanding bus lanes does not necessarily promote bus ridership in the bimodal system. Substituting Eq.
(42) into  Eq. (39), one obtains the marginal  effect of road  space allocation on the system cost.
Proposition   4.. Under the profit-maximizing bus service frequency and fare established in Proposition 2, expanding dedicated bus lanes
reduces the system cost if and only if


                                                                                                                                                                                                           (44)
Proof..  Substituting Eqs. (23), and (27) into Eq. (38), we have


     Proposition 4 establishes the analytical conditions with which  expanding bus lanes is beneficial to the whole system when the bus
service parameters are responsive. If a marginal increase of the space fraction effectively reduces the private car use while keeping the
traffic condition  on the left branch of the MFD, it also reduces the system cost. When the car traffic is hypercongested, the system cost
can be reduced only if the increase of space fraction attracts more private car users. The divergent properties on the two branches of
the MFD stems from the distinct effect of the modal split on traffic speed obtained in Lemma 1. When traffic is in uncongested regime
 larger  car inflow  results in lower  speed, whilst in hypercongestion  larger inflow  corresponds to higher
speed.
     The observations in Proposition  3 and Proposition 4  are combined to give the  following  proposition.
Proposition  5..  A Pareto-improving win-win situation (where an expansion of the bus lane results in both bus profit increase and system cost
reduction) occurs if and only if either Condition (43) holds or the intersection of Conditions (26) and (44) is valid.
     Proposition  5 establishes the conditions where  expanding bus lanes is beneficial to  both the  bus operator and the  system as a
whole in  the bimodal system with  space separation.

                                                                                                      217

11


           Table 1
           Functional forms and parameter values.
                                                                                             Functional forms                                                      Parameter values

             Car traffic speed-density relation                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                             
             Bus speed                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                             
             In-vehicle travel time                                                                                                   
                                                                                                  
             Full prices                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                
             Bus operating cost                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                              


6.  The system  performance  under  static  space distribution:     a numerical   illustration

     This  section employs  numerical analysis  to illustrate   the quantitative   effects of static  road  space distribution.  In  contrast to
Section 7 where the dynamic space distribution will come into play, everything  shown in this section is the steady-state result – upon
any snapshot, the input variables (e.g., road space allocation, travel  demand) are static and the output  variables (traffic  status, bus
service, modal split, etc.)  are in equilibrium   state.
     Consider a downtown area with the radius of 5km  and the length of 150km  of vehicle lanes. A fraction of road space is dedicated
to buses only.We assume that the travel demand is evenly generated in the region, and the congestion of car traffic is homogeneously
distributed over space and exhibits an MFD. The function forms and parameter values for the numerical analysis are listed in Table 1.
In particular,  the marginal effect of travel demand on average bus speed is represented by a linear function of the space allocation.4
The function  forms and parameter  values used in the  numerical analysis are for  illustrative   purpose. They should receive careful
calibration  and evaluation  when  applying the  proposed model for  different  cities  in  order to  draw specific  conclusions and suggestions.
     In  contrast to the earlier analytics that are limited  to marginal changes, the numerical analysis in this section is conducted over a
wide range of the  space allocation choices and/or demand levels.
     Fig. 2 shows the effects of increasing total travel demand in the bimodal system when a constant fraction   =  0.2 of the total road
space is allocated for bus lanes. While the demand changes, the bus fare and service frequency are adjusted accordingly by the profit-maximizing  bus  operator.
It  is  found   that  the  density  of  cars rises  to  the  critical   density  kc when  the  demand  approaches
1.62 × 10 4 prs/hr ; above this critical demand level, sharp upsurges occur in car accumulation and bus fare with downturn in service
frequency when car traffic enters the hypercongested regime. Such drastic changes lead to the incomparable scales of variables in the
two regimes of the  MFD. For illustration  purpose, the results are thus displayed in  two separated ranges of the total demand.
     The left  panel of Fig. 2 shows the results where the demand ranges from 4× 10 3prs/hr to 1.6 × 10 4 prs/hr and the right panel the
range of 1.7 × 10 4 prs/hr to 2.3 × 10 4 prs/hr . It is observed from the figure that increasing total demand has similar overall impacts in
both regimes of the MFD in terms of  the change directions of car traffic  density, bus fare, service frequency,5 individual travel cost,
operator’s profit  and social cost. When the total  demand increases, cars accumulate (Fig. 2(a) and (b)),  bus fare rises, service gets
denser (Fig. 2(c) and (d)), travel cost escalates (Fig. 2(e) and (f)), and bus operator earns more causing larger deadweight loss (social
cost) to the system as a whole (Fig. 2(g)  and (h)).
     The key  difference of the  two regimes lies  in the  change of the mode share as shown in Fig.  2(g) and (h).  In  the uncongested
regime, increasing total  demand leads to  the reduction  in  the mode share of  bus. The reduction  is given  by the  relatively  larger
marginal bus cost associated with the modal split than  the marginal driving  cost. In the current situation,  production  rate of the car
traffic increases with the demand as shown in Fig. 2(a) and the car system is able to accommodate more demand at a relatively lower
cost. The changes of frequency and fare however result in larger cost in accommodating demand increments. It is noteworthy that the
mode share is merely a  relative term  when the  total demand changes – reduction  in mode share does not imply  the  reduction  in
absolute number of users, nor the reduction in profit.  As shown in  Fig. 2(g), even though the bus mode share decreases, neither the
number of bus users nor the bus profit  decreases with the demand level.
     When  the car  traffic  is in  hypercongestion, the  mode share of  bus surges to above 90%  and keeps increasing with   the total
demand. Even though the bus fare has been extraordinarily high and frequency extremely low, most users choose bus mode because
choosing the alternative means running at a crawling  speed in hypercongestion. Bus looks almost like a monopoly which allows the



   4 The analysis in Sections 3–5 does not rely on the linearity; instead, it only requires the effect decreases with the space allocation, i.e.,
    .
   5 The bus traffic here is an aggregation of the traffic flow of all buses running within dedicated bus lanes. Such aggregated traffic contains multiple
bus lines that share similar routes/segments. Thus the service frequency reflects the aggregated frequency of all buses.

                                                                                                      218

12





Fig. 2. The effects of total demand on car traffic, bus service, individual travel cost, modal split, bus profit, and social cost with profit-maximizing
bus service.

bus operator to charge extremely high fares and maximize its own  profit.  Nevertheless, this stems largely from the assumption that
the total demand for cars and buses is perfectly inelastic to travel cost. In reality, users have other choices (e.g., not to travel, cycling)
and equilibrium will  be at a different point, probably resuming the uncongested regime. Also, our analysis ignores that bus capacity is
restricted, which  will  most probably create another equilibrium   point (by  influencing  the actual waiting  time  in Eq. (19)).


                                                                                                      219

13







Fig. 3. The effects of space allocation on car traffic, bus service, individual travel cost, modal split, bus profit, and social cost with profit-maximizing
bus service.

     Fig. 3  shows the effects of increasing  the proportion  of  road space allocated for bus  lanes with  constant total demand.  In the
meantime, the bus fare and frequency are governed by the profit-maximizing  bus operator. The left panel of Fig. 3 presents the low
demand case with D1 = 5× 10 3prs/hr , and right panel the high demand case with D2 = 2 × 10 4 prs/hr . Considering that in reality it is
impossible to indefinitely   expand the bus lane, we  set an upper-limit  for  the space fraction  (   =  70% ). We expect the upper-limit
would be lower than 70% in practice. The purpose of choosing such a value is to present as many numerical results as possible. Under


                                                                                                      220

14

each demand level, the faction of  bus lane space is increased from 10% to 70%.
     There are several common results under both demand levels. Firstly, the density of car traffic increases when the space for normal
traffic is shrinking in  both Fig. 3(a) and (b). The increase in density leads to the reduction in the traffic speed and the rise in the travel
cost by car. Correspondingly we observe increasing equilibrium travel cost in both Fig. 3(e) and (f). Secondly, we observe that the bus
frequency changes in the same direction with the bus mode share in Fig. 3(c) and (g), or in Fig. 3(d) and (h).  This is in line with  the
result of Proposition 2. Thirdly,  with  either demand level, the bus operator obtains more profit when more space is allocated for bus
lanes and the car traffic gets more congested. Fourthly, it can be inferred from Fig. 3(g) and (h) that the total social cost is negatively
correlated with the bus mode share – when bus mode share rises total social cost drops, and vice versa. In the low demand case, the
minimal social cost is achieved when the bus mode share is maximized and the space fraction is 0.568. The total social cost could be
reduced by allocating more space to buses when the car traffic is hypercongested. Therefore, Fig. 3(g) and (h) suggest that increasing
bus lane space is generally beneficial for the monopoly bus operator, and that it  is socially preferable to improve  the mode share of
bus in the bimodal  system.
     Comparing the results of different  demand levels, we could see that in the low demand case, the car traffic is in the uncongested
regime and  the  bus operator  provides  more frequent  service with   lower  fare.  In  the  high  demand case, the  car traffic   is hypercongested.
Over 90% of the travelers choose the bus mode, even though the bus operator provides sparse service with high fare.
Under low demand, the marginal effect of space allocation on bus mode share decays with the space fraction if car traffic remains in
the uncongested regime (refer to Fig. 3(a) and (g)). But in the high demand case, the bus mode share increases more sharply when the
space fraction is high (refer  to Fig. 3(h)).
     Similar  concerns for  the hypercongested regime  to the  analysis of  Fig. 2  remain  here. While  the hypercongested results are
included here for the sake of completeness, it is not expected that hypercongestion coexists with a stable bimodal equilibrium   for a
long time. As we will   describe later, hypercongestion yields more interesting  results with time-varying  space allocation.
     Normally  the allocation  of road space is decided by the transport  authority  at the higher level.  While the  transport authority  is
concerned with  social welfare  when shaping  the space allocation,  the private  bus company  is interested in  its  own  profit  when
determining the service plan and ticket  price. The above has shown that the two objectives (social cost minimization  and bus profit
maximization)  are partially  conflicting.  Therefore, it  is  necessary for the transport authority   to take bus operator’s responses into
account.
     Fig. 4 presents the interaction  between bus profit  and social cost in the two  dimensional space. The x-axis represents the space
fraction for bus lanes and the y-axis represents the total travel demand. For each combination of space allocation and travel demand,
bus operator chooses the optimal frequency and fare to maximize its profit (as in Proposition 2). Figs. 2 and 3 have shown that when
total  demand is high  the  car  traffic  would  surge to  hypercongestion. In  Fig.  4 the  boundary  where  the car  traffic  reaches hypercongestion
is outlined by the dash-dotted line. It  is evident that the critical  demand is lower  if less road space is reserved for car
traffic (from left  to right). The area above the critical demand is dyed in grey highlighting the hypercongested car traffic. In each area,
the blue solid curves sketch the bus profit  contours led by the  optimal frequency  and fare. The red dashed curves are the resulting











                           Fig. 4. Contour map of social cost and bus profit in the domain of space fraction and total travel demand.


                                                                                                      221

15


Table 2
The Pareto-optimal space fraction under profit-maximizing bus service.

  Total demand               0.25                           0.5                            0.75                          1                                1.17

  Pareto-optimal space fraction                 0.491                         0.568                        0.616                        0.695


social cost contours.  The green curve  outlines the  Pareto-efficient  frontier  in  the uncongested regime  where neither  of  the two
objectives can be further  improved  without  reducing the  other. In  the hypercongested regime the  Pareto-efficient curve does not
exist. For given demand level, the space allocation that simultaneously maximizes bus profit and minimizes  social cost is the upper-limit. 
Thus, it is always preferable to allocate as more space to bus lanes as possible pushing the optimal space allocation to the upper-limit 
(shown in  green dotted line). This  reflects the advantage of giving priority   to public  transport during  the peak period.
     For given levels of total  demand, the Pareto-optimal space fractions resulting the minimal social cost and maximal bus profit  are
summarized in Table 2.  It is  generally suggested that larger  space should be allocated for buses when total  demand increases. In
practice the travel  demand fluctuates  over time  within  a  day. It  is relatively  low  in  off-peak periods  while  much higher  in peak
periods. This requires the space allocation to be responsive to the demand changes, which motivates the investigation of the dynamic
space allocation in the next section.

7.  The dynamic  space allocation   and  responsive  bus service

     In  this section, we carry  out numerical  analysis on the bus service design in  response to the dynamic space allocation, and  its
impact on  the traffic  performance.  Our motivation   is to  develop and evaluate  different  operation  strategies, which are  typically
complex to  obtain  analytically.   The discussion based on  simulation   study will   provide  insights  into  multimodal   planning  and
management.

7.1. Case study set-up

     Consider a downtown area with the radius of (same as in the static case). A fraction of road space is dedicated to buses only.
We simulate an urban road traffic system for (T =  80 time units, 3min  each), a typical morning or  evening period. Demand has a
symmetric trapezoidal shape with  time and the length  of peak period is  equal to 1h,  shown in  Fig. 5(a).
     The setting  of the  MFD for  car  traffic  follows:  the free  flow  speed for cars, critical  density, jam
density. For bus running speed. The coefficient is set as a decreasing linear
function of  the space allocated to buses  : with.

7.2. Dynamic space allocation

     We consider a time-dependent  space allocation strategy: in  off-peak periods,  and ; during  the peak
period. Thus ts and te represent the starting and ending time of the peak-hour space allocation, and . As
travelers’ reaction to the change of space allocation would boost travel mode share during the peak period, the service frequency and
fare should be adjusted during the peak period,  in order to  maintain  service level and efficiency of the  space. We thus propose the
responsive frequency and fare settings in the following  way: when    and  ; when   and.
     Now  we examine  scenarios where the  demand-responsive space allocation and bus  service are implemented  where ,
 We present in Fig. 5 the  evolutions of  (a) total
demand, and the resultant (b) mode share, (c) car accumulation and (d) travel disutilities  (costs) over time. Fig. 5 demonstrates that
the steady state is  achieved in  each of the  implementing  time  intervals:   During  each steady state, the  car
accumulation is constant and travel disutilities are identical for the two modes. Under such steady state, the dynamic user equilibrium
is reached and the resulting mode share is exactly equal to the static bimodal equilibrium determined by Eq. (12). This indicates that
the steady-state analysis in Sections 3–6 also has implications in the dynamic context.
     Fig. 5 also shows that the variation of  mode split closely follows that of  disutilities which  reflects consistency. Car accumulation,
as a result of mode choice, shares the trend in time and explains the evolution  of disutility.   In between the steady states, transition
periods exist where the traffic  status and modal split fluctuate when  the space allocation and bus service changes. This is driven by
how we increase or decrease the space fraction which fundamentally  changes the traffic density and the  associated travel costs.

7.3. Optimal responsive bus services

     The efficiency  of  space allocation strategies in  congestion management can be strongly  influenced by  the level  of  transit operation. 
If a large  amount of space is dedicated to buses while the service frequency is limited  or bus fare is overcharged, travelers
may not choose buses. Congestion remains as mode shift is insufficient and space will be wasted. On the other hand, if many buses are
deployed in service with low fare charged, transit operators may lose profit  due to high operational cost. Furthermore, if more buses
are present in the network and larger mode share is requested, the service level of bus is also impeded as the operating speed of buses
decreases (recall from Eq. (10)), resulting longer  travel time.

                                                                                                      222

16








Fig. 5. (a) Total travel demand for the bi-modal system, (b) bus mode share, (c) car accumulation, and (d) travel disutilities under dynamic space
allocation and bus service.

     It can be seen that the bus operation optimization problem is challenging because different authorities are involved with different
concerns and preferences when planning  infrastructure,  setting up  service frequencies and bus fares. This problem  is  even more
complex when dealing with   multimodal  networks, where  the impact of  bus operation policies  and strategies on individual  modes
should be considered. To this end, we carry out an optimization framework to  obtain optimal  service frequencies and bus fares from
three perspectives: total travel cost of the  travelers (TTC), total  profit  of the bus operators (TBP), and total  system cost (TSC).
     The TTC includes travel time, waiting  time (for  buses), fixed cost of using a mode and the total money paid on bus fare. The TBP
contains two  elements, the total  money  paid on  bus fare minus  the cost  of operating  a certain  frequency of  service. Under this
treatment, optimizing the TTC (by minimization)  can have a direct conflict with optimizing  the TBP (by maximization). By definition,
the TSC is the sum of travel costs and bus operational costs, subtracting the total money paid on bus fare (as this amount is both cost
and benefit). Optimizing  TSC then aims to achieve a global minimization  of travel time  of the users and bus operational cost of the
operators.
     Optimization  of  the aforementioned three  problems is highly  non-linear.  We solve this  problem by  a non-linear programming
method, the sequential quadratic  programming (SQP), which solves a sequence of optimization  sub-problems (each of which opti-
mizes a quadratic model of the objective subject to a linearization of  the constraints). For detailed description of the SQP algorithm,
please refer to Nocedal and Wright (2006). We apply this algorithm for  multiple  initial  values (around 100) to avoid convergence to
local minima,  which might  be the case for a non-smooth objective function.
     Table 3 summarizes the optimal  frequency, bus share, and the resultant total travel  cost (TTC), total bus profit  (TBP), and total
system cost (TSC) under the three optimization scenarios. To achieve the optimal TTC, it is found that frequent bus service and cheap
bus fare are required. This is a logical result, as operation cost is not taken into account. A policy-maker can simply decide to deploy
as many buses as possible to decrease the waiting time of bus users, in order to lower the TTC. Such policy would not be in favor for
the bus operators, as the resultant  TBP has a negative value indicating  that  the operational  cost exceeds the profit  from bus fare
collection.
     Comparing to the optimal  frequencies and bus fares of the TBP, the picture is completely different. An interesting observation, as


                                                                                                      223

17


Table 3
Comparison of performances under different optimal cases.
  Bus operator’s objective The optimal frequency The optimal fare 


The numbers in bold-italic style indicate that they are the smallest values in the relative columns.

displayed in Fig. 6(a), is that the mode share of buses is zero until the middle of the peak hour (interval 40). The high price of the bus
fare, 3.6$ per trip, makes the bus a costly mode to be utilized in the beginning of the simulation period. It may seem counter-intuitive
that the bus operator sets up such price that drives away the users (customers). Let us now think a step further based on the resultant
MFDs illustrated in Fig. 6(b).  We will  understand that this is an excellent strategy for  maximizing  the TBP. In Fig. 6(b), it  is clearly
shown by the MFD  (the blue scatters) that  network  under a TBP operation  experiences significant congestion, represented by the
decreasing part of the  curve. Note that  there are  two MFDs for  each strategy (for  strategy TBP it  is more noticeable),  each MFD
corresponds to one space allocation ( , 1    )  which offers different  capacities for cars. As the car network  becomes more and more
congested and the travel  cost by bus outperforms  the one  by car,  the share of  bus users is increasing, even though  the bus fare
increases to 5$ per trip. This is a typical consequence of monopoly, where the bus operator enforces a profitable price given that users
have no other alternative. The resultant TBP outweighs the other two cases; however, TTC and TSC are twice as much as the ones of
the other two  cases.
     The last  strategy aims to  minimize  the  total  system cost TSC. The main difference  between this  strategy and the  strategy to
optimize TTC lies in the inclusion of the operational cost. As a result, we can see in Table 3 that (i) the optimal frequencies in this case
are smaller and more reasonable than the ones that optimize TTC, and (ii) the resultant TBP in this case is not only positive but also
reaches a decent amount. Fig. 7 below compares the time series of disutility by mode (travel cost in negative value) and travel time by
mode. In Fig.  7(a)–(c),  equilibria  of  travel cost  between the two  modes can be  found in  all  the  optimal  conditions of  the  three
strategies, albeit the duration of the equilibrium is uneven. Fig. 7(d)–(e) plot the travel time (TT) time series of cars and buses. For the
optimal TSC, it is promising to  see that the disutility  of bus improves during peak-hour as travel time  decreases. This accounts for a
nearly 30% mode shift  (see in Fig. 6(a) the curve in  green).
     As a general remark,  the results in  this  section highlight  the difference  in  performance among bus operations of  different objectives
and strategies under dynamic space allocation. Wedemonstrate that strategies that optimize the TTC or TBP ignore important
costs from the other’s perspective. The strategy resulting in the lowest TSC shows strong advantage in global optimum, though bus or
transit operators may need to negotiate with  the traffic operators to  obtain a higher TBP at an acceptable additional expense on the
TTC.

7.4. The importance of space allocation

     Let us consider space share for buses is not optimal,  for example applying  a 10% constant space over time, and reproduce  the
results as in Table 4. System cost and social cost increase regardless of reaching which objective; while the revenue for bus operator
decreases. Comparing to Table 3, it is found that the difference in costs or revenue is between 20% and 25% (e.g. from 7.03 to 8.62,
from 3.17 to 2.40).  When optimizing bus revenue, service frequency is adjusted to the change of space. In this case, more service is
provided during off-peak in response to more space; while less frequent during peak-hour to reduce operation cost, compensating the
lost revenue due to its lower speed. Similar trend can be observed when optimizing system cost. Interestingly, bus service frequency





                                             Fig. 6. The resultant (a) mode share of buses and (b) MFD of the three strategies.


                                                                                                      224

18




Fig. 7. Disutility time series for using cars and buses under the three strategies: (a-top left) TTC, (b-top medium) TBP, and (c-top right) TSC; Travel
time series (d-bottom left) TTC, (e-bottom medium) TBP, and (f-bottom right) TSC.


Table 4
Comparison of performances under different optimal cases and constant space allocation (non-optimal).
                      The optimal frequency (bus/10 min)      The optimal fare ($/trip)           TTC (10e5 min)   TBP (10e4 $)    TSC (10e5 min)

 

during peak-hour drops almost 40% (from 7.5 to 4.3), as a response to less lane space. If space is properly allocated, deploying more
buses can actually benefit the entire system (smaller TSC) as well as the bus operator (higher TBP), which highlights the importance
of space optimization.

8.  Conclusion  and discussion

     This paper  investigates the system-wide effect  of the  road space distribution   in a  bimodal  (private  and public  transportation
modes) system and how the bus operator responds to the space changes. The bimodal dynamic user equilibrium  is  formulated for
separated road space in the framework where  the MFD model captures the dynamics of  the car traffic  and  the delay of a  bus trip
depends on both space allocation and travel demand.
     The profit-maximizing   bus fare  and service frequency are  firstly  recognized for  given space allocation  in  the steady state. In
particular  the counter-intuitive  properties  of traffic  equilibrium   and optimal  bus service design in hypercongestion have been discovered. 
It is shown that when car traffic is in the uncongested regime the car usage increases if bus service level decreases. When the
car traffic  is in hypercongestion, higher usage corresponds to higher speed. As the consequence, neither improving bus service nor
providing more  space for buses could necessarily increase the bus ridership. The optimal frequency is in line with  the “square root
principle”  implying   the profit-maximizing   bus service  also exhibits  increasing returns  to scale. It  is  further  revealed that  under
comparable conditions, the service frequency would be identical on the two branches of the MFD, while the bus fare would be higher
in the uncongested regime than in hypercongestion. To understand the interaction  between the transport authority  (system benefit-maximization)
and the  bus operator (profit-maximization),    we examine the  effect of  road space allocation  on the bus  operator’s
benefit and explore how the  total system benefit changes with the  allocation. The marginal  profit  of bus operation associated with
marginal bus lane capacity is proportional  to  the bus fare, while  its change direction is consistent with  the marginal  bus ridership.
With the responsive bus service, the condition  under which  expanding bus lane capacity is beneficial to  the system as a whole has
been established. Numerical analysis shows that the  total social cost  can be reduced by improving  the  mode share of bus service
where the service is determined by a profit-maximizing   operator. A Pareto-optimal  space allocation that simultaneously minimizes
social cost and maximizes bus profit  has been identified  for  given total  travel  demand. It is  generally suggested that larger space

                                                                                                      225

19


should be allocated for buses when total demand increases. This requires the space allocation to be responsive to demand changes in
the temporal horizon.  The model is thus applied to  the dynamic framework  where the space distribution  changes with the varying
demand and a case study is carried out on the responsive bus service to the dynamic space distribution. Wehave explored the optimal
bus service in  terms of  system cost-minimization,  bus profit-maximization   and  user cost-minimization.  The  effectiveness and in
congestion management of the three operation strategies are compared. Results show that different space allocation and bus service
strategies can be developed utilizing the proposed system model and optimization.
     This paper integrates the bimodal equilibrium  model and the aggregate traffic flow model. In contrast with other models of traffic
congestion, e.g., the BPR function where congestion is assumed to depend only on the current demand without any memory for the
level of congestion at  previous times, the  MFD captures the state-dependent hypercongestion where flow  decreases as density increases
beyond a critical value of density, and is consistent with  the physics of  traffic congestion at network  level.  The integration
with  MFD models  enables the model  to  describe the aggregate traffic   status using a  well-defined  relationship  while  allows  for
analytical tractability   to some extent. In this sense, this paper contributes to the literature  by providing  an analytical  framework to
model the multimodal  interaction  and spatial effect and to  capture the aggregate properties of traffic  flow,  and sheds lights on the
relevant policy  and decision makings.
     The analysis of this paper could be fruitfully  extended in several directions. Firstly, the analytical derivation  in this  paper focuses
on the properties of  the profit-maximizing   bus service. The comparison of bus services with  other economic objectives (e.g.,  total
system cost minimization, maintaining  breakeven) deserve research efforts. Secondly, it has been implicitly assumed that the transit
operator adjusts service immediately after the road space distribution is changed. In practice, such adjustments can take considerable
time. To perform  an accurate cost-benefit analysis, the accounting time horizon  could be divided  into two  intervals:  a short run in
which transit service is fixed, and a long run  in which  it is endogenous. A distinction could also be made between the time required
for fare adjustments and the (typically  longer) time required  to adjust frequency and other dimensions of capacity. Such an analysis
would also be  of interest  in determining  whether  transit  adjustments are beneficial  or counterproductive.  As an extension of  the
current model,  the relationship  between the  space allocation and  the bus service accessibility  can be incorporated  by adding  an
endogenous bus access cost term in Eq. (11). Theoretically, this term should negatively correlate with the space allocation parameter
  . In order to  obtain the specific function  that  can well demonstrate the underlying  relationship, quantifications  need to be carried
out based on empirical data and then can feed into the current modeling framework. The inclusion of such endogeneity will increase
the complexity of the analytics, but we expect the whole analytical process is achievable following the framework of the current study
and adopting similar  techniques. We will  actively explore this  extended model in future  studies.
     Another  interesting direction  is to investigate how  the road space management coupled with other  strategies such as perimeter
control (e.g.  Ampountolas et  al., 2017;  Ramezani et al., 2015;  Kouvelas et al.,  2017),  car usage tolling  (e.g. Zheng et  al., 2012;
Daganzo and Lehe, 2015; Chen et al., 2016),  and transit subsidy  (e.g. Basso and Jara-Díaz, 2012; Zheng et al., 2016) can further
improve the state of the multimodal system. Our results reflect clearly the conflict between the objectives between the system and bus
operators (i.e. Min  TSC versus Max TBP). The system operator can influence  traffic  performance through  its controlling   over the
allocation of road space between general and bus lanes. The space share can be optimized, after evaluating the total social costs under
a certain level of  bus service. In turn, the  bus operator can adjust the service frequency and fare in  response to the given bus lane
capacity. The nature of  this relationship  between the two  operators, makes their interacting  process a leader-follower Stackelberg
Game. We are intrigued  to investigate  if  there is an  equilibrium  exists between their  objectives  TBP and TSC through rounds of
competition. Our  on-going effort is towards  this direction.



Appendix  A.  The derivations   for  Eqs. (17)  and  (18)

     Eq. (16) is  equivalent to
                                                                                                                                                                                   (45)
where t in  brackets is omitted in  line with  the steady-state context. According to  Eq. (7), where ,
                                                                                                                                                                  (46)
     Substituting  Eq. (46) into  Eq. (45), we have v cna 2 2v cn cna + nc lxa = 0 , where the unique solution in the range 0 < na nc is

                                                                                                                                                                                    (47)


                                                                                                      226

20


      Substituting    Eq.  (47)   into  Eq.  (46),   we  have

           

      Similarly,    where   

                                                                                                                                                                                                        (48)
      Substituting    Eq.  (48)   into  Eq.  (45),   we  have   
                                                                                        , and  thus
                                                            

Appendix    B.   The  uniqueness     of   the  interior     bimodal     equilibrium       in   the  steady    state

      The  equilibrium      car  usage  xa  is  determined    by    ,  where   is given   in   Eq.  (20).   Thus,   the  underlying
 assumptions   for  interior    equilibrium      are (similar    assumptions    are made   in  Zhang  et  al.,  2014):
      (i)  A  too  congested   highway    if  all  choose  to  drive:
    

                                                                                                                                                                       (49)
      (ii)   A  too  congested  transit    if  no  one  drives:
       
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (50)
      When  the  car  traffic    is  on the   left  branch   of  the  MFD,  i.e.,   0 <  na      nc ,

 

      Since  the  interior    equilibria    ensure   g (xa =  0)  >  0 , it  is  evident   that  g (x a) =  0 has  and  only   has one  positive    solution.
      When  the  car  traffic    is  hypercongested,    i.e.,  nc <  na      nj ,


      which   is  a  quadratic    equation    of  variable    xa.  When   xa =  0 , h (xa =  0)  =       nj (vb0    D)  <   0 . Under   the  interior    equilibrium      as-
sumptions   Eqs.  (49)  and  (50),   the  quadratic    coefficient    is  positive   as

      


      According    to  the  laws  of  quadratic    equations,   there   exists  one  and  only   one  positive   solution   to  h (x a) =  0 , and  so is  g (x a) = 0 .
      In  summary,   the  equilibrium    demand   for  car  xa can be  uniquely   pinned   down   in each  regime   of the  MFD.  Given  the  inelastic   total
demand,   the  equilibrium     mode  share  can  thus  be  determined.





                                                                                                                     227









                                                                                                                                        230

