1
            




 Bus lanes with intermittent priority: Strategy formulae and an evaluation


                                               


Abstract


    This paper evaluates strategies for operating buses on signal-controlled arterials using special lanes that are made intermittently
available to general traffic. The advantage of special bus lanes, intermittent or dedicated, is that they free buses
from traffic interference; the disadvantage is that they disrupt traffic.
    Weﬁnd  that bus lanes with intermittent priority (BLIPs), unlike dedicated ones, do not signiﬁcantly reduce street capacity.
Intermittence, however, increases the average traffic density at which the demand is served, and as a result increases
traffic delay. These delays are more than offset by the beneﬁts to bus passengers as long as traffic demand does not exceed
by much the maximum ﬂow possible on the non-special lanes; the smaller the excess the better. BLIPs are not intended for
roadways nearing or in excess of capacity.
    The main factors determining whether an intermittent  system saves time are: the traffic saturation level; the bus frequency;
the improvement in bus travel time achieved by the special lane; and the ratio of bus and car occupant ﬂows.
In some scenarios where a dedicated bus lane could not be operated, a BLIP can save to bus and car occupants together
as much as 20 persons-min of travel per bus-km. The required conditions for this to happen are quite particular. Typical
savings are smaller. Formulae are given.



Keywords: Bus lanes; Intermittent bus priority; Transit signal priority; Intelligent transportation systems; Advanced public transit systems




1. Introduction


    Urban   traffic   congestion  severely impairs  the  effectiveness and  attractiveness  of  bus  systems. As  a result,
and despite  their  limited   resources, transit agencies have  to  spend a considerable   amount  of  time  and  effort
implementing   workarounds  to  the  problem.    Inexpensive  solutions   that   do  not  involve   new  infrastructure
are the  most desirable.




2


    One low-cost option is transit signal priority (TSP). With TSP, buses can extend the green phase of traffic
signals to claim the right-of-way and proceed unimpeded through an intersection. A handful of studies have
documented the beneﬁts of TSP implementations (Balke et al., 2000; Banerjee, 2001; Cima et al., 2000; Duerr,
2000; Furth and Muller, 2000; Garrow and Machemehl, 1998; Hunter-Zaworski et al., 1995; Janos and Furth,
2002; Kloos et al., 1995; Lin, 2002; Nash and Sylvia, 2001; Skabardonis, 2000). Unfortunately, TSP loses effectiveness 
with heavy traffic because the signals have to accommodate, not just the bus, but also the traffic in
which it is embedded.
    Dedicated bus lanes (DBLs) are another option. They may be combined with TSP to increase their impact.
Unfortunately, DBLs  remove one lane from general use and therefore reduce capacity. Obviously, DBLs are
only appropriate for low traffic ﬂows. This limitation  can be partly overcome by opening the bus lane to general
traffic intermittently  when not in use by a bus.
    Viegas and Lu (2001, 2004) seem to have been ﬁrst in proposing and analyzing the concept of an intermittent bus lane (IBL).
The system in these references restricts automobiles from changing into the bus lane ahead
of the bus, but does not request those vehicles already there to leave the lane. As discussed in the references,
signal adjustments would be used to ﬂush the queues at traffic signals and clear the way for the bus. These
signal adjustments may increase the amount of green time allocated to the arterial at times when the arterial
demand is low, bus this could reduce the capacity of side streets and increase delay.
    The IBL  variant proposed here, termed ‘‘BLIP’’ (which  is short for bus lanes with intermittent  priority),
forces traffic out of the lane reserved for the bus with variable message signs (VMS). BLIPs do not require
changes to the signal settings. Therefore, they should be efficient and easy to evaluate. BLIPs can be combined
with TSP, if desired.
    This paper uses deterministic analysis techniques of traffic ﬂow (kinematic wave) theory to study the feasibility,
costs and beneﬁts of BLIPs. We recognize that IBLs and BLIPs will not eliminate any problems currently experienced with DBLs,
such as accommodating right turns and dealing with pedestrian interference. If these problems are pressing,
infrastructure-intensive  solutions such  as bus-rapid-transit  (BRT)  may  be required.
Comparisons to BRT are not in the scope of our analysis. Therefore, BLIPs will only be compared
to the DBL and ‘‘do-nothing’’  (mixed-traffic operation) alternatives. Section 2, evaluates the automobile
carrying capacity of BLIP systems, and Section 3 shows how to estimate the travel time savings to both the automobile
and bus occupants of an under-saturated BLIP system. Section 4 discusses the results and describes the
proper domain of application for  BLIPs.



2. Capacity analysis

    A BLIP  is essentially a set of rolling spatial cocoons (bus-lane sections) in which buses travel to the 
exclusion of other traffic. Each cocoon starts at the rear bumper of its bus and extends a ﬁxed distance ahead. This
zone is kept clear of non-bus traffic to ensure that the bus does not experience any delay. For practical reasons,
the exclusion zone is assumed not to travel continuously along the roadway, but to advance discretely one
block at  a time.  VMSs, possibly combined with  in-pavement lights,  would announce the changes. These
changes would create temporary bottlenecks at the locations where lanes are dropped. These bottlenecks
are the critical BLIP feature that an analysis should dissect.
    Shaheen et al. (2005) presents a preliminary analysis of BLIPs, which uses a number of assumptions about
cycle lengths, signal offsets and level of service constraints. They limit its generality. Our approach will yield
rougher but simpler results and more general insights.
    The proposed approach pertains to large systems, with so many blocks and bus stops that the street on
which the bus moves can be treated as a homogeneous road without signals—i.e., where the disturbances
of the traffic signals can be averaged in time and space. Buses are then modeled as slow vehicles that interfere
with the ﬂow of traffic, as ‘‘moving bottlenecks’’. The presence of buses reduces capacity and creates delay, but
not as much as if a lane had been dedicated to the bus. This macroscopic idealization will reveal the main factors affecting performance,
and simple formulae quantifying their effects. The next three subsections introduce
supporting concepts and notation from kinematic wave theory (Section 2.1); describe the operation in more
detail (Section 2.2); and estimate capacity (Section 2.3).

3
                                  

2.1. Kinematic wave theory

    This analysis uses concepts of the kinematic wave (KW) theory proposed by Lighthill andWhitham (1955)
and Richards (1956). This theory provides tested techniques for modeling traffic ﬂow and queuing. It informs
us on phenomena describing the dynamics of queue growth and discharge, the formation of stationary states
in space–time, traffic response to signals and moving bottlenecks. The theory has limitations but can predict
reasonably well average trip times over long distances, which is the metric of interest in our analysis.
    One component of KW theory is a fundamental diagram (FD) that describes the relation between ﬂow and
density in the steady state. Our analysis assumes a triangular FD for all lanes combined, as displayed in Fig. 1.
This is both simple and experimentally justiﬁed.
    The ﬂow at any given point on the diagram (a stationary ‘‘traffic state’’) will  be expressed as a ‘‘q’’ with a
subscript matching the label of the point on the diagram. For example, the ﬂow at point E will be qE. Fig. 1
depicts two curves. The outer, larger curve pertains to the full roadway, when all lanes are open to traffic. The
inner, small curve describes the ‘‘reduced’’ roadway—when one of the lanes has been reserved for the bus and
is therefore no longer available to private vehicles. Fig. 1 displays the following traffic states, which will turn
out to be of interest throughout this  paper:

O          empty roadway
A          generic uncongested
J           full roadway, jam density
C          full  roadway, capacity
F          reduced roadway, jam density
E          reduced roadway, capacity
B          full  roadway, congested conditions with same ﬂow as state E
G          reduced roadway, congested conditions with same speed as B

    Kinematic wave theory describes how a road in any initial  condition  (characterized by a distribution of
states along its length), and with any feasible input ﬂow, evolves over time. Of particular relevance for this
paper are the moving bottleneck models in Gazis and Herman (1992) and Newell (1993, 1998).












                                         Fig. 1. Fundamental diagram illustrating full and reduced roadways.

4
734                                










Fig. 2. Time–space diagram of a BLIP operating at capacity: traffic moves at maximum speed (faster than the bus) in all regions, except
for F and J, where it is stopped, and B, where it moves slowly.


2.2. The  BLIP   operation  and its  effect on traffic


    Fig.  2 is  a time–space diagram  constructed   with  KW   theory  of a  BLIP  system operating   at capacity—with
maximum  entering  ﬂow  from  upstream.  The diagram  in  Fig. 2 follows   the convention   for labeling  traffic   states
described above. The  states displayed  in dotted  shades of grey  (E2 and F)  are restricted,  i.e., correspond  to  the
inner  diagram  with  one  less lane. The  states displayed  with  solid  shades are unrestricted.   Traffic   in restricted
states cannot  delay  a  bus. The  diagrams  assume  that  the  restriction   is announced   by variable   message sign
(VMS)  postings  at  every intersection.   The VMS   is activated  at the  far  side of  an intersection  when  it  is determined
that  the vehicles  discharging  from   that  intersection   would  otherwise   queue in  front   of the  bus.  These
postings  create a  space–time region  of  (dotted)   restricted  states  that  allows  the  bus to  travel   unhindered  by
traffic and   vice versa. A  dashed  line depicts  a hypothetical   bus  trajectory:   the slope  of  this trajectory   represents
the average speed of  the bus,  factoring  in  delay  from  bus stops.  The ﬁgure  also  depicts a  car trajectory.
Notice  how the  bus is allowed  to  pass the vehicles queued at the  signal in  state F,  and how  traffic  is allowed  to
pass the bus, when in  state E2. Also  notice that  the  bus passes through  several intersections  with  green signals:
the bus does not  derive beneﬁt  from  BLIP   when passing green signals.  The primary   beneﬁt  to the  bus is jumping traffic   queues at  intersections.
    Our   diagram  assumes: (i)  that   postings  last  for  a full   cycle, 1
                                                                                                               and  (ii)  that  vehicles  to  have  seen a posted
restriction   must   obey  it  for   the  full   length   of  the  block   until   passing  the   VMS   at  the  next  intersection.
Although   the  ﬁgure  does not  explicitly    show the  postings,  the  reader  can verify   that  it  is  based on  (i)  from
the  result:  note  that   the  restriction    must  obviously   be  ‘‘on’’   at  an  intersection   whenever   its  ‘‘world   line’’
(the  trajectory    of  the  intersection)    touches  from   below   a  restricted   state  E2 during    a  green period;   and
‘‘off’’  when  the  downstream  state  is unrestricted.


  1
    Shaheen et al. (2005) also examine a less restrictive approach where postings can change in mid-phase, but ﬁnd that the beneﬁt of this
generalization is small. Since the generalized approach is more complicated to implement, and could create confusion among drivers, it is
not considered here.

5
  

    As  noted  above, changeable  message signs at the  far side  of every  intersection  communicate   to  drivers  the
BLIP  status:  lane restricted  or  lane available.  This  mechanism automatically  ﬂushes all  vehicles out  of the  bus
lane at  every intersection   immediately   after  its  downstream  restriction   is  activated—the   vehicle  queue on  all
lanes (state J) simply  discharges  into  a reduced  set of lanes  (state E2)  during  the green  period. 2  This is  shown
clearly  by  Fig.  2, which   has been drawn   to  scale. In  every  such instance  there  is  a small  triangle   of  state B
upstream  of  the  intersection,   which  describes the  congested  conditions   caused by  the  lane-drop   bottleneck.
These conditions  have the  effect of extending  the  time that  it  takes to  discharge the queue,  as the ﬁgure  shows.
Note  that  several VMSs   may be  activated  simultaneously   to  clear  enough space ahead  of  the bus.
    Fig.   2 shows how   disturbances  grow  and  propagate  when  upstream  traffic   demand  is  large. The  reduced
queue discharge  rates caused by  VMS   signs create queues of  state  J traffic   at some signals  that  do  not  completely dissipate.
Remnants  propagate   back to  the  upstream  boundary,   and manifest  themselves  as spillovers that  block  access.


2.3. Analysis  of  BLIP   capacity


    As  the above analysis  has indicated,  a BLIP  creates long-lasting   queues that propagate  upstream  when  trafﬁc demand
is  at  capacity—or   close to  capacity.  Considering   that   subsequent buses can  be delayed  by  these
queues, further   analysis is  necessary to  determine  the collective   effect of  all  the buses.
    To  this  end,  we consider  a  long  bus route  with   many  stops operated  on  a  homogeneous  road  with  many
signals. The  signals  run  with   the same  cycle, c,  and  green phases,  g, but  arbitrary    offsets. (More   generality
would  cloud   the issues at  hand;  therefore,   extensions  will   be discussed at  the  end  of  the  paper.)  We  zoom
out  to  a large  scale of  analysis,  where the  impacts  caused by  the  signals  can be averaged  out  and  the  street
treated  as if  it was  roughly   homogeneous.


2.3.1. Macroscopic   methodology
    The  ﬁctitious   road  should   have a  set of  stationary   states that   closely match   the spatially   and  temporally
averaged states of  the real  road.  We assume that  the  intersections  are sufficiently   separated to  guarantee  that
the capacity  of  the system  is unaffected  by the  offsets. This  is reasonable  in any  setting  where a  BLIP  may  be
considered.  The system  capacity  (maximum   ﬂow  with  signals)  is then  qM=   qCg/c.
    Our  analysis  assumes that the set of  macroscopic  states that  can arise and  be sustained on this  street can  be
approximated  by  a trapezoid  with  corners  at points  O (the origin),   M,N   and  the jammed  state, J; see Fig. 4(a).
The reason for  this  shape is that  roadways  with  signalized  intersections  can  support  a maximum   average ﬂow
(averaged over  multiple   cycles)  at  a range  of  average  densities (averaged  over  multiple   blocks).   The  lowest
average density  state that  can  support  maximum   ﬂow  (deﬁned  here  as macroscopic  state  ‘‘M’’)   occurs  when
an upstream   queue discharges  into   an empty   roadway.   Using  the  traffic   state convention   described  above,
Fig.  3(a) illustrates   the details  of  macroscopic  state  M  for  a pair  of  intersections  with   no  offset. At  the  other
end of  the  spectrum,  the highest  average  density  state that  supports   maximum   ﬂow  (deﬁned  here as macro-
scopic state  ‘‘N’’)   should   occur  when  a congested  system dissipates  from   downstream:   this  is illustrated   by
Fig.  3(b). Note   how  the total   outﬂow  of  this  more  congested system  is the  same as in Fig.  3(a).  Because signalized roadways   
often  exhibit  a  range (M   to  N)  of traffic   states with   peak ﬂow, 3 the  FD  used  for  a macroscopic analysis  is trapezoidal.
    This  is reasonable.  Patterns  with  average densities  between kM and  kN arise for  example  if  parts of  a street
are in stateM   and  other parts  in  stateN;  this  dichotomous   state of  affairs is stable and  sustainable.  Hence, the



  2
    To simplify Fig. 2, we have assumed that the VMS restriction is placed at the intersection threshold and that this placement would not
change the queue discharge rate per (available) lane. This is slightly unrealistic. Maximum discharge rates, however, can be strictly
preserved by moving the sign farther downstream; e.g., to the middle of the block. This is also a better solution from a human factors
perspective. We did not present it because it yields more complicated diagrams. Fortunately, as we shall soon see, the macroscopic analysis
of this paper does not depend on the speciﬁc location of the sign; only on the discharge rates being ﬁxed. Therefore, our results apply to the
favored placement even more accurately than to the threshold placement.
  3
    The relative position of pointsM andN depends in a complicated way on the timing plan. For some plans,M= N; for others they are
far apart. See Newell (1981) for more discussion.

6









           Fig. 3. Time–space diagram of an arterial operating at capacity: (a) light average density; (b) heavy average density.


horizontal line containing pointsM  and N will be called the capacity line. The slope of the rising (left) branch
of the trapezoid, denoted u, is  the average speed of traffic in state M.  Linearity  implies that  this speed is
assumed to be the same for all uncongested states, although in reality the average traffic speed declines with
ﬂow. To capture this effect we introduce a separate parameter for the speed when the road is empty, v0, which
should be greater than u. (A better approximation would recognize that the rising branch of the trapezoid is
concave, since speed declines with ﬂow, but the shape of this branch depends on details of the signal settings
that are cumbersome to specify. The effort would be of little value because the uncongested states that arise in
our analysis are usually close toM.) We also use a linear dropping branch, since its shape is even less important.
Note that the slope of this branch must be shallower than the slope of the FD for the road without signals. 
There is a reason for this: since the coordinates of point N are generalized averages in the sense of Edie
(1963), point Nmust be at the center of gravity of points O, C and J, when they are weighted by their areas on
the time–space plane; obviously, point N must be interior to triangle OCJ.
    By deﬁnition, the new FDmatches the stationary states observed on the real road.We propose that this FD
can also be used with KW theory to describe the macroscopic dynamics of the road with and without BLIPs.
To see that this is reasonable let us examine the backward wave speed of the modiﬁed road. The backward
wave speed is an important determinant of dynamic behavior, since it is the speed at which disturbances propagate inside queues,
which helps determine their length. Note from Fig. 4(a) that the wave speed of the new FD (the slope of  the dropping branch)
is signiﬁcantly  less than the original, as we have already discussed.
Reassuringly, we see that the disturbances ‘‘B’’ of Fig. 2 are delayed at the traffic signals; they travel with
the original wave speed between signals, but experience delays and indeed travel with a lower average speed.
The reader can verify that their average speed is indeed the wave speed of the modiﬁed FD. Thus, we can be
conﬁdent that treating the road as we are suggesting is reasonable, even in the dynamic case. This is convenient
because buses and their cocoons can then be modeled as KW moving bottlenecks.

2.3.2. Effect of a single bus on a long street
    For ease of explanation we initially  treat these bottlenecks as points (neglecting the spatial extent of the
cocoons) and generalize the results later. Moving bottlenecks can create different traffic conditions upstream
and downstream of their locations—when they hold back a queue. When this happens, upstream traffic is in a
congested state (U) and downstream traffic in a freely ﬂowing state (D). The ﬂow of state D (the bottleneck
capacity) is assumed to be the capacity of the reduced system (minus one lane) including the effect of signals,

7
                                   





Fig. 4. Macroscopic diagrams of a BLIP system: (a) fundamental diagram showing moving bottleneck; (b) time–space diagram showing
effect of a single bus.



 in agreement with Gazis and Herman (1992) and Newell (1993, 1998). Conservation of ﬂow
past the bottleneck implies that the interface between states (the bus), which travels at an average
speed of, is expressed in the  by a line with slope vB from state  to state . Thus, the position of state
Uon  the  is completely determined; see Fig. 4(a). Note that state has higher ﬂow than. If the speed of
the bus is sufficiently high, as occurs in the ﬁgure. For typical values of the parameters, even if is
on the dropping branch.
    According to  KW  theory,  if  the road  was inﬁnitely long  and there was an  inﬁnite demand waiting  to
enter, the introduction of a single BLIP  bus would result in the pattern of Fig.  4(b) in the neighborhood of
the bus. If the dimensions of the bus cocoon are non-zero but too  small to be discernible in the picture, it
is obvious that the states illustrated would be the same: the size of the cocoon is trivial compared to the sizes
of the neighboring traffic states. (Additionally, traffic state D is, in effect, the cocoon.) Thus, the ﬁgure applies
to cocoons of any size when used to examine the evolution of the system for an indeﬁnitely long time. We see
that the beginning of the roadway would switch from stateD to stateU after the bus passage. Hence, qU is the
maximum ﬂow that could be sustained; i.e., the capacity (qmax) of the single-bus BLIP system on an inﬁnitely

8


long street. Thus, This shows that the introduction of a single BLIP bus does not signiﬁcantly
reduce the street capacity, which was qM to begin with. By comparison, a dedicated bus lane reduces street
capacity by  from  . This  suggests that BLIPs should have the most  to offer  when traffic
demand exceeds qD because then a dedicated lane is infeasible.

2.3.3. Multiple buses
    Extending the analysis to more than one bus is easy. Fig. 5 illustrates the situation where the BLIP lane
makes up a portion of  length L  of the roadway in  question and buses follow each other with headway H.
We assume that buses are not coordinated with the signals and (momentarily) that  the time-dimension of
the cocoon (which is comparable with the signal cycle c) is small compared with the headway (i.e.)
The fundamental diagram for this situation, Fig. 5(a), indicates that the traffic demand is in a state with ﬂow
. The time–space solution in Fig. 5(b) shows that the state introduced by each bus downstream of
itself, meets with the congested upstream traffic stateU from the previous bus, canceling out a wedge of state
A. The wedge may be truncated if the road is very short. In either case, the average ﬂow across any point on the
road is, independently of, and this ﬂow can be sustained for any number of headways. Thus, any
ﬂowqA 6 qU can be sustained.We also see from the analysis that demands qA greater than qU cannot be accommodated. 
Thus, qU (qM) continues to be the car-carrying capacity of the system, provided Hc.
    For smaller , the scale of Fig. 5(b) would be such that the size of the cocoon would become nontrivial and
should be included in the analysis. It can be seen in Fig. 2 that the actual time-width of the cocoon is about
two cycle lengths. If we deﬁne ^c as the cocoon width , the bus trajectories of Fig. 5(b) would become











  Fig. 5. Macroscopic diagrams for a multi-bus BLIP system: (a) fundamental diagram; (b) time–space diagram with multiple buses.

9
                                 










Fig. 6. Time–space diagram illustrating situation when the cocoon time-width is accommodated. The dashed line represents the extent of
the bus cocoon.


bands of time-width in which state D would prevail. As shown in  Fig. 6,if the geometric pattern
between the bands is similar to the original, of time duration H ^c instead of, and the maximum possible
demand in the inter-band portions would continue to be. By prorating the maximum ﬂows in the band and
inter-band regions we obtain the following formula for  the automobile-carrying capacity of the system:

                                                                                      
Weassumed in the construction of Fig. 5 that stateU is on the capacity line. If the bus speed is so low that Uis
on the declining branch of the FD, the diagram of Fig. 5(b) would look only slightly different. A picture would
reveal that in this case too, a ﬂow equal to qU can always be accommodated, and that qU qM, as we have
already mentioned. If we make this substitution in (1), and also use the relation , we ﬁnd

                                                                                                  

The ratio appearing in this formula is the fractional reduction in a streets car-carrying capacity caused
by the BLIP.  Values on  the order  of just  a few  percent should be typical—the reduction  is 5% if  n=4,
c = 1 min, and H=  10 min.
    To summarize, we have shown that a BLIP can accommodate a car ﬂow up to a level close to independently of the BLIPs
length if the street has three lanes or more and the BLIP headways are considerably longer
than the signal cycle. Under these conditions, BLIPs do not signiﬁcantly reduce road capacity. However, as
should be clear from Fig. 4, BLIPs do change the character of capacity traffic by increasing the average density
at which capacity is achieved. This change in character affects level of service, and this is examined next.

3. Level of service analysis

    We consider in this section the delay imposed by a BLIP on a traffic stream, assuming that the demand does
not exceed capacity. We will express the results in terms of ‘‘average pace’’; that is the average number of minutes required to travel a mile.
We will do this, ﬁrst for the traffic stream and then for the bus. We will compare the change in pace for both modes before and after the BLIP.

3.1. The effect of BLIP on automobile delay

    We ﬁrst consider the asymptotic case of a very long bus line, with L!1,and   then examine the corrections
due to end effects. We assume that the bus average speed is such that qU qM and that the demand is in the
range.

10
740                            

3.1.1. Long roads
    Assume to begin with that Hc   and neglect the width of the cocoon. The diagram of Fig. 5(b) applies. If
for a  given FD,  L is  allowed to grow  while H  is held constant, the wedge of state A  stays pinned to  the
upstream end of the diagram without any change, but the interface between states U and D will grow. For
very large L, the diagram consists of alternating parallel bands of states U and D,  with  a negligible wedge
of state A at the bottom.  We assume here that the bands extend from the beginning to the end of the road.
The correction due to the wedges will be presented later; it is negligible for large L.
    Let HU and HD denote the time span of each band, such that

                                                                                                                                      

Since the average ﬂow in one headway must be qA at all locations, we have


This determines the relative width of each band.
    The total number of vehicle-minutes spent by drivers between two consecutive buses can be written using
Edies generalized (average) density for the time–space region between buses, which is

                                                                                                               

The expression for vehicle-minutes of travel per bus is (see e.g., Daganzo, 1997),

        Total  time per bus                                                                                                             

    Recall now that Edies generalized ﬂow for the time–space region between buses is 
Thus, the generalized average state between buses is point (kS,qA) of the density-ﬂow plane. As shown
by Fig. 5(a), this is the point at which the horizontal line for ﬂow intersects segment. The speed associated
with point is the average speed of traffic. The length of segment, denoted , is proportional to
the increase in travel time caused by the BLIP. Fig. 5(a) shows at a glance that this penalty increases linearly
with both, the demand, and the average bus pace. In fact, letting denote the increase in the vehicle-minutes of automobile
travel induced by one bus-kilometer we have

                                              

If the physical dimension of the cocoon ð^c ¼ 2cÞ is incorporated into the analysis, bands of stateD replace the
bus trajectories of Fig. 5(b) resulting in a picture such as Fig. 6, and the overall portion of the diagram covered
by state increases. Because traffic in stateD travels at free-ﬂow speed, the overall average traffic speed in the
time–space region between bus headways increases, and (5a) is an upper bound to the penalty imposed by a
BLIP. The actual penalty can be easily derived by repeating the analysis; it turns out to be times
smaller; i.e.,

                                                                      

The correction makes sense: if c^¼ H the BLIP would behave like a dedicated lane, which does not delay traffic
as long as demand stays below capacity (2)—just as predicted by (5b).

3.1.2. Short roads
    If  the road is short Eq.  (5) overestimates the BLIP penalty because it assumes that the initial triangular
wedge is in state S when it is actually  in state A  (with no  delay). The spatial extent of  the wedge, x0 (see
Fig. 6), is easily obtained from the slopes of its sides and the dimension of its base ðH ^cÞ. We ﬁnd

The vehicle-hour penalty in the ﬁrst x0 miles of road only applies to 1/2 of the band between buses; i.e., the
part not covered by the wedge. Thus, to be precise, penalty (5) should be applied to a road that is shortened by
 distance units; i.e., the exact formula is
                                                        

11


If the wedge reaches the downstream end of the road, and the penalty per bus is ﬁxed, independent of
the headway. This penalty should increase with the square of and equal the value of (5a) for.
Thus, we have


3.2. The effect of BLIP on bus pace: cost–beneﬁt comparisons

    The bus performance results are clearer if expressed in terms of pace. Thus, we introduce 
and as the prevailing, traffic-free and signal-free automobile paces, respectively. The last parameter corresponds
to the speed limit. Typical values for an arterial street are: The
bus paces should be roughly equal to the auto paces plus the bus stop-time per kilometer. If we use the letter
with the same set of subscripts to denote bus paces (in mixed traffic, with a BLIP and with a BLIP/TSP), we
have: We actually expect b to be slightly greater than (p + s) if the signal
system is designed to accommodate the prevailing traffic without regard for the bus stops; perhaps on the
order of 0.2 min/km. 4
                                  If min/km (a reasonable value for a line with infrequent stops) then the bus paces
on our hypothetical arterial could well be: .
    A BLIP  implementation should reduce the bus pace from b to b0; i.e., by about 0.4 min/km. If the number
of passengers in the average bus is O (pax) then the passenger-minutes saved per bus-km traveled, d,is

      

If  then pax-min/bus-km in our hypothetical scenario.
    Society should decide the criteria for implementation of a BLIP, but a critical factor in this decision should
be the relative magnitude of d (capturing the beneﬁt to transit patrons) and  (capturing the disbeneﬁt to drivers).
Assuming that automobile occupancies are close to 1, society should probably not consider BLIP if d is
much smaller than D.  In terms  of pace (5) indicates that  . In  our  typical example,
; then, if we take  (at the lower end of the values reasonable for a BLIP) we ﬁnd
, where ﬂows are expressed in veh/min. This  value should be comparable or  smaller than
 for  a  BLIP  to be appealing; i.e., the  traffic demand should satisfy 
min, or 120 veh/h. This is the value by which traffic demand for a BLIP can exceed the capacity of a system
with a dedicated lane and still be of some beneﬁt. 5

    Of course, this conclusion depends on the values of the parameters we have chosen for the comparison. A
quick test for long roads can be based on the inequality  which, after grouping terms of (5b) and (8),
reduces to

The ﬁrst term of (9) is the ratio of bus-passenger to car-ﬂow (modal split); the second the ratio of bus travel
time reduction to  bus-stop delay (improvement in bus service); the third  (on the right  side) the fractional
amount by which traffic ﬂow exceeds the capacity of the arterial with a dedicated bus lane (traffic saturation
level); and the fourth the fraction of traffic cycles unaffected by the BLIP (a dimensionless measure of bus frequency).
If the inequality is not  satisﬁed, it is most efficient in terms of people cumulative time savings to
operate the bus in mixed traffic. Note that the inequality is most likely to be satisﬁed when s is small, suggesting
 that BLIPs should be most successful when used for express bus service.
    The comparison we have made assumes that qA > qD but BLIPS can also be considered if the demand is
lower. In  this case, the analysis methodology of this paper would show that  introduction  of  a BLIP  does
not disrupt traffic  signiﬁcantly. But if  demand is signiﬁcantly lower than qD (say 400 veh/h or less for n=3
or 4), one should also be able to  introduce a  dedicated lane without much disruption.  Therefore, a BLIP
has a distinct  advantage over other alternatives only  if  the  demand is close to ; e.g., 
    
If turning traffic interferes with bus performance signiﬁcantly, b0 should also be increased.

    In actuality, the limit should be slightly larger because we did not account for the beneﬁt of added reliability.



in  our  hypothetical   scenario.  This  range  of ﬂows  can  be expanded  if  the  BLIP  is  combined
with  TSP. Note  that  a  BLIP  operation   can be turned   off or  morphed  into  a  dedicated lane  at will.   Therefore,
it may  be  useful where  traffic  conditions   or  bus  frequencies  change with  time.


3.3. BLIP/TSP    systems


    The  advantage  of  a  BLIP/TSP   operation   is  that  it  further   reduces the  bus pace  to  bf. The  beneﬁt  to  bus
passengers can be quantiﬁed   with  (8),  which  continues  to  apply  with   bf substituted   for  b0. The disadvantage
of a  BLIP/TSP   operation   is  that  it  is more  complex   and potentially    disruptive   of  automobile   traffic.  
Fortunately,  as we shall  soon  see, the increased disruption    is usually  small.
    We  assume that  buses preempt  signals  by shortening   the  red phase in  which  they  would   otherwise  arrive,
and that  they do so by  the least amount  necessary to receive a green phase. Wealso  assume that  buses arrive at
a signal immediately   downstream   of a  stop independently   of  its cycle—due  to  the random   necessity for  stopping.
Under   these assumptions,  the probability   of  a bus arriving   during  the  red phase (needing  preemption)  is
To  accommodate  such arrivals,   the red phase will   on average have to  be reduced by  1/4 of  its length 6
                                                                                                                                                                               
terminating   it  earlier  or starting   it  later;  i.e., by .  Thus,  the  unconditional   expected  reduction  in  red  time
per bus  arrival  should  be:  
    To  leave side streets as unaffected  as possible,  we further  assume that  the  reduction  in  their  green time  due
to the  passage of a bus  is canceled in  ensuing cycles with   an offsetting  increase  of the  same magnitude.  Thus,
the arterial  red time  will  increase in the  headway following   the  passage of a bus by an amount  averaging  

c. The decrease in red  time (increase  in green time)  occurs  when the  discharge rate  is reduced by  one lane,  but
the decreased green time  occurs when  it is not.  Thus,  there  is a net loss of  arterial  capacity  at  the intersection.
The loss  equals:

         Capacity   loss due  to TSP

Fortunately,   this  is usually  a small number.   If we  take (conservatively)      and   the ﬁrst  factor
is 0.0125. But  it  should  be smaller  in  most  cases. Thus, we  see that TSP,  if  implemented  properly,   imposes  a
capacity penalty   roughly  equivalent  to  (at  most) 1%  of the  capacity  of a single  lane. This  is insigniﬁcant.   Furthermore,
 a (small)  capacity  reduction   has no  discernible  effect on  the approximate   traffic   analysis of  Section
3.2. Thus,  (5)  continues  to  apply.
    It  follows   that  (9) can  also be used to  assess the suitability   of  a BLIP/TSP   if   substituted   for  . We ﬁnd
for the  same data of Section  3.2 that  d =  24 instead of  12 (pax-min/bus-km).    Thus, the  range of applicability    is
expanded to   above the  system capacity  with  a dedicated  lane. We
expect the competitive   advantage of  a BLIP/TSP   over a dedicated  lane with  preemptive   bus priority   to decline
quickly  as in  the case of  a pure  BLIP.   Roughly  speaking,  a BLIP/TSP    doubles  the maximum   excess demand
where intermittence    reduces time   in  the  system,  and  also  doubles  the  maximum   possible  reduction—from
about  10 to  about   20 pax-min/bus-km.    Reductions   of  this magnitude,   however,  can  only  be  expected when
traffic  demand  is very  close to  the  system capacity  with   a dedicated  lane.


4. Discussion


    We  have examined  in  this  paper the  effects of  BLIPs,  with   and without   TSP,  but  have not  commented   on
the beneﬁts of  signal priority   without   a dedicated  lane. Pure TSP  strategies are not  real competitors   with  BLIP
or BLIP/TSP    when the latter   can be used. If  we were running   a signal  preemption  system  without   reserving a
lane, but  the  lane could  be  reserved without   signiﬁcant   disruption   to  traffic,   then converting   the  preemption
system to a  BLIP/TSP   would  yield  some improvement   since  the bus would   avoid  all  queues and the  preemption
times  could  be shortened.   Therefore,  we  conclude  that  pure  preemption   should  only   be used when  the


  6
    If the signal priority scheme was either only red truncation or green extension, the expected reduction in red signal time would be :
the expected value of a uniform random variable that ranges from . However, the signal can be modiﬁed in two directions: either the
green can be extended (for buses arriving in the ﬁrst half of the red signal) or the red can be truncated (otherwise). Therefore, the average
red phase reduction is the expected value of a uniform random variable ranging from r.

13



demand  exceeds the  upper   limit   of  the  BLIP/TSP    range  of   applicability.    Thus,   we suggest  the  following
(rough)  domains  of  application   for   the transit   management  strategies in  the  scope of  this  paper:


   (1)  DBLs  and  DBL/TSP:    demand  less than  80% or  90% of  qD;
   (2)  BLIP  or  BLIP/TSP:    demand  close to  qD; and
   (3)  Pure TSP,  with  queue  jump  lanes if  possible 7 : demand larger  than  120% of  qD.


    This  ranking   is mostly   qualitative,   but  it  shows that   BLIPs  have  a deﬁnite  niche  in  the ecosystem of  bus-friendly
transportation    management   strategies. Sharper  boundaries   can be deﬁned  with   the formulae   of  this
paper for  speciﬁc system  conﬁgurations.   Eq. (9)  for  example shows that  the  beneﬁts are likely   to be most  pronounced 
for  express  bus  service (when  s  is  small).  The  formulas,   however,   are  only  approximations;    they
should  be complemented  with   more  detailed  study  if  an implementation    is being  considered.
    The  formulas   in this  paper  assume that  the lane-changes  created by  the  VMS  signs do  not  reduce the  saturation
ﬂow  per  lane at  the signals. But  this  is optimistic   if  signiﬁcant   lane changes are allowed  to  occur  near
the signals.  We have already  mentioned   that  to  avoid  this  problem,  VMS   restrictions  should  be  put  in place,
not at  the intersection   threshold,  but  toward  the  middle  of  the block;  this  would  in  addition   better  accommodate
right   turn  movements.  Eichler   (2005) discusses design issues in  more  detail.
    This  analysis  treats many  aspects of BLIPs   as black  boxes: the operational   details  of  many of  the technical
components  are  not  important    to  the potential   costs  and  beneﬁts  of  a BLIP.   For   example,  it  matters  little
whether  the  application   logic  is  centralized  or  not.  It   is assumed, however,   that  the  vehicle  location  system
and application    logic  work  together   to maintain   an  accurate  trajectory   projection   for  the  bus,  and that   this
projected  trajectory   is the  basis for  control   of  the VMS.   Eichler  (2005)  discusses the technology  components
that  can be used  to  implement  BLIPs.
    The  formulas  of  the paper also  assume that the system is homogeneous,  has little  turning   traffic  and is time-independent.  
This  is sufficient  to  derive some insights,  but  the  formulae  should  be modiﬁed   if these effects are
important.   We propose  that  the  traffic  dynamics  of  a BLIP,  including   all  these complications,   can be roughly
described by  the  KW   model  with  a  truncated  FD   typiﬁed   by  the truncated   trapezoid   ODUNJ   of  Fig.   5(a).
This is  reasonable because the  macroscopic  steady  states of  the system (on  a scale of  observation   large  compared with
the bus  headway  and  the bus  spacing)  fall  on  the truncated   trapezoid.   Since the  traffic  stream  is
modeled as a homogeneous stream  with  no-passing,  kinematic  waves make sense. The BLIPFD    has four  wave
speeds, and the reader can verify  (with  some effort)  that  indeed the  transitions  between regimes  propagate with
the required  wave  speeds. For  example, transitions   between  states on branch  DU   can be  shown always  to  be
contained  between  two  consecutive  buses, and  therefore  to  propagate   with  speed vB, as required.   The  kinematic wave
model allows  one to  examine a system with  entering  and  exiting  traffic  very  quickly  and to  analyze
it numerically   with  very  little  effort.  The results  are, of  course, only  approximate,   but  can be obtained  without
the tedium  and  potential   for  large  execution  errors  arising  when  setting  up  a micro-simulation.
    We  have  not  attempted  in  the  above  to quantify    all  the beneﬁts  of  BLIP/TSP    service. In  addition   to  the
estimated  time  reduction,  BLIP/TSP    can  also reduce  random  ﬂuctuations   in  travel   and arrival   times,  which
should  further   enhance  the appeal  of  the  service.  These added  beneﬁts  could   perhaps  be a  deciding  factor
in cases where total   user time  in  the  system is not  signiﬁcantly    changed.



  7
    A queue jump lane is a shoulder-side ﬂare on the upstream side of an intersection that is reserved for buses and right-turning vehicles
(Rosinbum et al., 1991; TRB, 2000; Mirabdal and Thesen, 2002). The extra lane allows buses to ‘‘jump’’ the traffic queues at the signal.
These lanes often have special signalization that allows the bus to pull into the intersection before the vehicles in the other lanes, giving the
bus priority as it returns to the through-traffic lane. This is attractive but BLIPs do the same without the expense of additional right-of-way.

14



