1
                                                                                                    





Flexible spaces as a “third way” forward for planning urban shared spaces              





1.  Introduction                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                         
     Once  the   site  of   a  small  but   active   urban  scene,  downtown        
Christchurch, New Zealand, tends to be quiet most evenings, since the        
2010 and 2011 earthquakes ﬂattened much of its  center. And while  a        
scattered handful  of  clubs,  restaurants, and  cafés continue  to  draw        
nightlife  downtown, Christchurch's dominant features are now the vast              
number of compromised  structures and vacant lots  where earthquake        
damaged buildings once stood.                                                                       
     This  setting made  the scene at  Christchurch's “Dance-o-Mat”  one        
evening in the Fall of 2016 all the more incongruous. In a ﬁeld of rubble       
where a  high-rise  once stood, the  Dance-O-Mat is  an oasis of  light,         
sound, and motion  in  the midst  of  an otherwise inanimate  nocturnal         
urban  landscape. Created by  “Gap  Filler”   a  local   non-pro ﬁt group        
dedicated to bringing  life and art  to the city's numerous empty spaces,       
the Dance-o-Mat consists of an open-air dance ﬂoor with ﬂoodlights and     
loudspeakers, a mirror ball,  and a  re-purposed coin-operated washing       
machine sporting an audio jack. Inserting a $2NZD coin into the slot of         
the washing machine activates the lights  and speakers, allowing users        
to plug a music player  into the  system for an impromptu  public dance        
party. This particular  Saturday night  has seen half a dozen local teen-        
agers, a pair  of international   artists,  a family  from  the  US with  two
small children, and a mob of jovial North Islanders all sharing the ﬂoor,       
dancing to a mix of hip-hop, classic disco, and Japanese lounge/techno
in an increasingly  interactive,  ebullient,  and multi-generational  street              
party.  And this  evening  is no  anomaly.  This experimental  project  is        
currently seeing almost 2000 activations  per year and may become an        
international   franchise  with    new  Dance-O-Mats  in   Canadian  and        
Australian cities (Gates, 2015).                                                                       
     While  unique, the Dance-O-Mat is emblematic of a new generation        
of what  we  describe as “Flexible  Spaces” in  cities  with  a surplus  of        
underused, abandoned, or vacant space, along with  a  need for urban        
revitalization.  Such experiments are often characterized by their limited
duration, temporary  use of borrowed land,  and experimental, community
 driven design and operation. This study interrogates the possibility
of  using such “Flexible   Spaces” as tools for  pursuing  a third-way   of
engaging in  urban planning  for shared space, instead of conventional
expert-led  and procedural-participatory  frameworks.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a framework  for  creating Flexible  Spaces
that   are   minimally    regulated,   reconﬁgurable  and  democratically
available on a rotating basis to individuals  and groups who wish to use
those spaces for activities of a limited spatial and temporal tenancy. By
enabling  a broad range of users to engage in the ongoing creation and
management of the built environment,  free from most of the traditional
processes of land use regulation, Flexible Spaces potentially offer a new
approach  that  can sidestep many longstanding  shortcomings of  planning. 
 We address these shortcomings in  Section 2. Section 3  outlines
what  a coherent  approach to  planning  through  Flexible Space might
look  like,  based upon a  set of conceptual guides.  Section 4 examines
how Flexible Space can help address the endemic problems of planning.
Finally,  Section 5 offers a series of empirical  case studies to illustrate
how and why  these conceptual guides can offer a new, “third   way”  to plan.

2.   The problems  with   planning

Traditional  planning seeks to base policy decisions on processes that
go beyond political exigency or executive authority.  Although there are
a number  of  well-established contemporary  approaches to  planning,
they are distinguished by where they place ultimate discretion  over the
analysis and  evaluation of  policy  decisions, generally within   two  distinct   frameworks; 
the  expert-led  and the  public  participation  models
Brody,  Godschalk,& Burby,  2003; Day,  1997;  Fagence, 1977; Innes,1996;   Juarez&Brown,    2008). 
In   expert-led  frameworks,   decision-making


2

 is based on urban  planners' expertise; whereas public  participation 
frameworks  are intended to  generate opportunities for  citizens        
and communities to express their needs and offer their knowledge with        
planners mediating those processes.                                                              
     In   countries  of   the  core,  dominant   planning   approaches have        
evolved in response to broader social dynamics. The post-World War II        
faith in  science and expert knowledge led  to practices that  vested authority  
in  professional  planners (Brooks,  2002; Filion,   2001; Taylor,         
1998). The subsequent backlash against the worst of 1950s and 1960s             
expert driven  planning  – including   urban renewal  and  dysfunctional        
modernist “vertical  slums”–reﬂected   a broader  challenge to the post-war 
status quo and the disempowerment  of marginalized  populations.        
Critics  of   conventional  approaches  excoriated  the   anti-democratic        
vesting of authority  in planners, and the  resulting class and racial bias        
animating  much  of  their  work   (Harvey,  1978).  Planning  education        
began to rethink  planning as a tool  for  providing  communities both  a       
voice in the policy decisions affecting them, and an opportunity to share       
their knowledge of their  own neighborhoods and needs (Brooks, 2002).      
The resulting  procedural-participatory  model  rapidly  gained  political         
momentum as a vehicle to  incorporate stakeholders into  the decision-making  
process (Arnstein,  1969;  Brooks,  2002).  Under  this  model,              
governments describe major projects in early planning stages, and give       
citizens opportunities to provide feedback throughout decision-making,        
development  and  implementation.  The  planner's  resulting   role  has
shifted towards the  ‘mediator expert’,  combining the  interpretation  of         
citizen   feedback    with    support    of    community    decision-making             
(Campbell& Marshall, 1999).                                                                           
     Notwithstanding  planners' best efforts, the procedural-participatory              
model has, in  practice, fallen  short  of its  ideals of  opening up  urban        
planning to  those who have long  been excluded due to a  lack of economic, 
cultural  and/or  political  power. It  often fails to  enhance public        
participation,  include disfranchised communities, or create meaningful              
opportunities     for    their      input,     (Carson,    2011;    Day,     1997;        
Juarez&Brown,  2008; Reddel&Woolcock,   2004). While  planners and        
theorists have attempted  to address these shortcomings by proposing              
intensive  communication,  collaboration,   and  deliberation   processes       
(Anderson, Cissna,& Clune, 2003; Campbell& Marshall,  1999; Dennis,             
2006; Forester, 1999), wealthy, well-connected, and/or  well-organized
stakeholders [referred  herein  as “elites”]  nonetheless remain  able to              
drive  planning  outcomes (Maginn,  2007)  reinforcing   the  sense that        
planning simply  serves to legitimate   the preferences of powerful  stakeholders (Carr,  2014).  
Additionally,   the  tendency of  individuals  to         
reject uncertainties associated with changes to their  environments has
made “NIMBYism”–the  insistence that change happen “not in my back              
yard”–inescapable,       impeding  essential  policies   and  investments        
(Barlow, 1995; Devine-Wright,  2009; Lake, 2007).                                         
     The  coexistence of  these two  paradigms  has led  to  a  structural         
contradiction within   planning practice. Notwithstanding  the ostensible        
dominance of  the procedural-participatory   model,  the  expert-led approach continues 
to  pervade the  planning  profession (see, e.g., Ellis,        
2005). And while  public input  based processes remain “best practices”            
(Slater, 1984),  planners simultaneously incorporate  those approaches       
with  expert-led practices at  a variety  levels (Brody  et al., 2003)  with         
planners and policy   makers able to  vary  the  discretionary  authority         
vested in the  public (or  even sub-groups of the  public)  depending on        
when and how  each approach is mobilized  (Carr, 2014).  By enabling        
planners to shift discretionary authority  between the public,  elites, and       
other stakeholders on  an  ad-hoc basis, contemporary  planning  often        
combines the  worst  of both  approaches, putting   the  public  through        
intensive processes while disregarding their input when it is not aligned       
with   the  interests  of   more   powerful   constituencies  (Carr,  2012).         
Moreover, a  growing   literature  aﬃrms   planners' longstanding  complaints that 
politicians  often  undermine even  the best designed planning  processes 
(Anderson  et  al.,  2003;  Carr,  2014;   Cuthill,   2004;        
Innes& Booher, 2004).                                                                                     
     It  is unfair,  however, to lay the  blame for planning's ills  entirely  at        
the  feet  of  individual   planners,  or  the  planning  discipline.  Because
planners  occupy an  uncomfortable  space between the  governed and
those who  govern, it  is  unsurprising  that they  often  have limited  influence                                                                                                                   74
 on either.  Indeed, it  has been argued that  even though politicians,
the public, and even planners themselves have seen planning as a
ﬂawed project,  contemporary approaches persist because they enable
elected  officials to  enact policy  while  avoiding  the wrath  of powerful
stakeholders (Carr, 2012) and the greater voting  public  (Carr, 2014).
Further  critiques  of planning  are rooted  in  forces as broad as the
working   of real  estate markets,  and  as intimate  as  those of  human
psychology. Given  the  permeability  of  planning  to  politics,  it  is  unsurprising
 that  Marxist critics  have treated planning  as a tool of capitalism,
while  highlighting  the inability  of  conventional planning to alter
existing land use patterns driven by capital investment (Harvey, 2003).
Moreover, there is a growing concern that stakeholders are often poorly
situated to meaningfully  participate in  planning, as humans often fail to
accurately predict whether planning  outcomes will be satisfactory once
implemented  (Tetlock, Skitka,&  Boettger, 1989). In turn,  this tendency
may be seen as fueling NIMBY resistance to even the most democratically
 and carefully  articulated  planning outputs.
These critiques indicate the extent to which contemporary planning
suffers from  a  host of  largely  unresolved  structural  problems. These
include:
1) The tendency of planners to pre-determine outcomes, bringing their
own  biases and predisposed approaches to planning exercises;
2)  The  failure  of  urban   planning  to  integrate  truly   democratic  representation in  decision-making;
3)  The tendency  of economic,  political,  and  cultural  elites  to overly inﬂuence  planning outcomes;
4)  The inability  of stakeholders to accurately envision how they will be impacted by proposed planning  outcomes;
5)  The inescapability of  NIMBY resistance;
6)  The failure   of elected  oﬃcials  and  other  governmental  actors to translate planning  outcomes into policy;
7)  And the limits  that logics of private property  and capital investment place upon planning.
Accordingly,  any  alternative  to conventional  planning  approaches should seek to address some, if not all, of  these entrenched problems.
 
3.  Flexible  Space deﬁned

Our proposed elements for a de ﬁ nition of Flexible  Space were developed through
an extended series of observations in a  variety of international
contexts, including  site visits  in Australia  and USA and extended periods
of residence in Japan and New Zealand. We have drawn
upon our experiences to analyse a range of ﬂexible spaces emerging in
different cities across diverse socio-cultural,  political,   economic, and environmental  contexts.
Based on our analysis of  the case studies outlined below,  we offer
the  following characteristics of Flexible Space as a starting  point for
envisioning  how  consciously created environments  that  integrate  alternative  
approaches  to  tenancy,  use,  exclusivity,  and  imagination
might  address some of the failures  of conventional  planning.  Flexible
Spaces are intended to  offer  reconﬁgurable, rotating,  non-permanent,
non-exclusive  forms of  land  use that enable a  broad range  of spatial
experiments. For convenience, we describe individuals  or  groups who
exercise a period of  management over Flexible Spaces as “activators”,
and those for whom the space is created and/or  who end up using the
space as “users”.  Additionally,   some Flexible  Spaces may need  ‘administrators’:
individuals  or  groups who  intermediate between  potential  activators, 
users and other  parties, such as landowners or governmental 
authorities. Ideally,  activators and administrators are part of the
communities  where Flexible  spaces emerge, endeavoring  to  address
recognised problems  felt   by  the  broader  community.  We  offer  the




3



following  seven characteristics as  guidelines for  creating  spaces that             
allow activators  and users to plan by doing.                                                        


A) Fixed, non-renewable, spatio-temporally  limited  tenancies. Flexible        
     Spaces should be characterized by tenancies long enough to enable            
     development, modest investment,  use, continuity,   and promotion,              
     while  still  being  ﬁnite.  Without   suggesting minimal  or  maximum             
     periods of  tenancy, the  appropriate  durations  will  depend on  the             
     broader  context for   the space, regional  social  and  economic dynamics, 
     and even the proposed uses. It is hard to imagine a tenancy
     of less than two  weeks or more than a year  at most being feasible.        
     Too short a time would prevent activators  and users to fully explore             
     a use, and longer tenancies might  suggest a degree of permanence            
     that  undermines ﬂexibility,   and  could encourage primarily   proﬁt-             
     focused projects. Instead, the goal should be to allow enough time to           
     enable development, use and exploration while  maximizing  opportunities 
     for subsequent experimental uses and maintaining a sense of          
     immediacy.                                                                                                       


B) Shared tenancies. Activators'  tenancies should rarely  be exclusive.        
     Ideally,  multiple   activators  will   simultaneously  use  and share a             
     given space. This may take the form of concurrent use of the same or          
     overlapping spaces, or of different activators'  uses alternating over             
     time.  The goal is  to  explore the  bene ﬁts from potentially  complimentary 
     uses that are otherwise precluded by exclusive approaches             
     to property.  Ideally,  bringing  together multiple  visions  for a  space            
     will  allow the function  of that space to evolve, reﬁne, and hybridize.            


C) Reconﬁgurable space.  To  the  greatest  extent  possible,  Flexible        
     Spaces should be changeable. While proscribing materials  and designs 
     is  beyond  our  scope, certain  commonalities  can  be  listed.              
     Materials  should be movable,  ﬂexible, multipurpose,  and without         
     predetermined  function.  The  cable reel,  collapsible  theatre  riser,        
     folding  chair,   shipping  pallet,  shipping  crate,  jersey  barrier,   oil
     barrel, industrial  scaff old system, and shipping container all typify         
     the components that  can help structure  and enable Flexible  Space            
     due to  their fungibility,   recyclability,   durability,  scalability,  accessibility,             
     malleability,   and  ﬂexibility.   While  Flexible  Space offers             
     opportunities and challenges for activators  and designers alike, it is             
     essential that objects created or modiﬁed for a given  Flexible Space            
     do not foreclose alternate future  uses.                                                           
                                                                                                                              
D) Minimalist  regulatory  frameworks. The function of Flexible Space is            
     to enable user and activator innovation.  Any  regulatory framework              
     governing a  Flexible Space – whether required  by a governmental              
     agency, cooperative,  property   owner,  or  hosting   organization  –             
     should be minimal.  Ideally,  it should be limited  to:                                        
     1. Ensuring compliance with  relevant health, safety, environmental,             
         and criminal  laws;                                                                                       
     2. Providing   fair,  open, and  democratic processes for  choosing a             
         succession of activators and setting appropriate spatio-temporally            
         bounded tenancies;                                                                                     
     3. Ensuring  the  ongoing availability   and  viability   of  the  Flexible             
         Space.                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                              
These three functions are intended to protect users and activators, while
maximizing  opportunities  for  them to  create, evolve,  and experience        
bene ﬁcial uses. And because Flexible Space is inherently experimental,           
it must also be a space for potential  failures  and the resulting  lessons,            
such that even struggling  uses normally have  the chance to run  their              
tenancies.                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                              
E) The requirement  of  new uses. At the  conclusion of  a tenancy, the              
     replacement tenancy should be, as much as possible, a new use so as        
     to enable experiment  and renewal. This feature is  also intended to              
     promote   equal  opportunities   for   other   activators   and  prevent
             conventional  planning,  as Flexible Space eliminates the  punishing
those who simply  seek to continue a prior  activator's work.

F)  Designing for unscheduled uses. Flexible  Spaces should  provide 
space for unscheduled, impromptu, and ﬂeeting uses, enabling users
to simply show  up and  brieﬂy  be an activator. These can be self-regulated                                                                                                                  75
areas or areas with an informal sign-up. They should be subject to minimal  regulation,
have limited tenancies and should not disrupt previously  established activators' uses.

G) Free or  minimal   cost tenancies. To  encourage a  range of  spatial
experimentation,  and to reduce the  barriers to  less privileged activators,
the cost of  activating  should  be kept  to  a minimum,   preferably  free.
This is intended  to allow  for  uses that are neither  capital  intensive,
nor proﬁt-focused. While new businesses creation is not incompatible with  Flexible Space, for-proﬁt tenancies should be
limited,  or proﬁts shared with other activators to support alternative uses.

H) Potential on-site  expansion. As experimental spaces, Flexible Spaces
should enable their activators' experiments to develop a life  beyond
the original  tenancy. For uses that are potentially commercialized or
supportable  through  grants, crowdsourcing, membership,  or other
forms of funding,  Flexible Spaces may serve as launching points for
more permanent projects elsewhere. For uses that could scale out to
become more  conventional  forms  of public  space, the  temporary
space may offer a proving or test ground.

4.  The  case for Flexible Space

The foregoing guide for creating Flexible Spaces is intended to help
address  many,  if  not   all  of  the  structural   failures  of   conventional
planning described above:

1)  The tendency of planners to pre-determine outcomes. Once created,
Flexible  Space eliminates the need  for planners'  interventions,  replacing
them  with   a  succession of activators   from  a  variety  of
backgrounds. The requirements  of limited  tenancies and new  uses
can prevent a given activator's preferences or biases from locking in
the character or use of that space. And by allowing individual biases
and  preferences (whether those of an  activator  or the users of  the
space) to fully   ﬂower  over the  duration  of  a limited  tenancy, the
beneﬁts,  shortcomings, contradictions, and possibilities  inherent to
such approaches may be fully explored and built upon. This is not to
say that conventional planning approaches cannot lead to, or cannot
be essential for the  creation  of flexible  spaces in some cases. We
would expect that  ﬂexible  space can be used as a planning tool in
both expert  driven and participatory  planning exercises. Nor is it to
say  that   framing  a  planning   project  around   ﬂexible  space approaches
would necessarily insulate it from  the inﬂuences of expert
based and/or   participatory   planning   practices.  Rather, Flexible
space planning creates a direction forward that is not inherently tied
to  either of  these traditional  approaches, and is structured  around
minimizing  the  in ﬂuence of experts  and the  tendency to  channel
community  input through  expertise.

2)  The failure  of planning  to integrate truly  democratic  input  in decision making.
By  replacing  a democracy  of procedure  with a democracy of  process, and  by replacing planning by planners with
planning  by activators  and  users, Flexible Spaces potentially  help
address endemic concerns about  the  failure  of  procedural-participatory planning  (let  alone expert-rational  planning)  to ensure that
stakeholder input is genuinely democratic and inclusive.  Activators'
tenancies must be distributed in a fair,  open, transparent,  and democratic  way. The barriers  to  doing  so are much lower than in


4



     aspects of conventional planning, by which intensive involvement is         
     often rewarded by adverse permanent decisions, notwithstanding an            
     individual  or group's best efforts. Instead, Flexible spaces both lower           
     the stakes for  planning  with  ﬁnite  tenancies and reward  involvement 
     by enabling groups and individuals to directly put their  visions             
     into  action. Also, non-activator  users can “vote with  their  feet”,in                
     deciding whether, how, and when, to use a given Flexible Space at a           
     given time, rewarding successful uses with greater user engagement.          
     Any  given use will   allow  planners and  policy  makers to  see how             
     much the  users of a  given tenancy actually  represent the  broader             
     public without   having that use “locked in”.  In  short, Flexible Space
     allows people to envision, try, and evaluate proposed uses in real         
     time.                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                              
3)  The tendency  of   elites  to  exclusively  drive   planning  outcomes.             
     Flexible space planning is  perhaps most promising  in its  ability  to              
     bring new,  previously excluded populations  into the  project of city              
     making. While  a number of the projects we  draw upon below  were             
     initiated,  envisioned  and/or  administered  by those who  might  be             
     considered “creative  class” due to  their  cultural,   political,  and/or              
     economic leverage, what we  ﬁnd  most intriguing  about  these projects 
     is  their  ability  to  either  create or  suggest new  openings for             
     marginalized  stakeholders  to   meaningfully   engage in   planning.
     Indeed, an  embrace of ﬂexible  space planning  points the  way  towards 
     a new role for architects, planners, and urbanists. Rather than            
     serving either  as experts to  whom  the public  should  defer, or  interpreters  
     through  which   public  input  must  be  ﬁltered  and  implemented, 
     we  propose to  instead  position  these creative  professionals 
     as  creators and  enablers of  ﬂexible  spaces in  which  the             
     public may  subsequently plan by doing.                                                         
                                                                                                                              
Similarly, several of  the characteristics outlined  above are intended to             
ensure as broad a  range of  activators  and users in  ﬂexible space as             
possible. Limited   tenancies  should  help  immunize   Flexible  Spaces            
against privileged  activators  seeking  to  use that  space to  either  reinforce 
patterns of  structural  advantage, or to  pursue long-term  maximization  
of capital  investment. While  nothing  would prevent  elites –             
whether economic, political   and/or  cultural  – from  serving as activators, 
the democratic distribution of tenancies and minimal tenancy costs
would  create spaces for otherwise marginalized  populations  to  participate 
as activators  as  well.  Likewise,  because the sheer amount  of        
process involved in conventional participatory planning often precludes
a huge swath of  the population   from being  meaningfully  involved  in         
planning, the elimination  of much,  of this process promises to open up            
flexible space activation to a  broader range of  actors. And while  successful 
creation  and administration   of  ﬂexible space –  like  any  improvement 
to  the built  environment  –  could open the  door  to neighborhood gentriﬁcation, 
this  link is  not inevitable.  Rather, if regulators              
and/or  activators are  truly  representative of  the community,  Flexible              
Space could provide a bulwark  against gentriﬁcation by directly  tying              
planning to community  needs. For example, the use of a ﬂexible space            
to provide needed resources for homeless members of a community in a
neighborhood with  a large  at-risk population  could  help render those         
community  members “in   place” while  discouraging gentriﬁcation  at              
their expense.                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                              
4)  The inability  of stakeholders to envision planning outcomes. One of             
     the  greatest potential  strengths  of  Flexible  Spaces as a planning              
     method is that they  shift participatory  planning  from an exercise of             
     anticipation   to  an  exercise of  exploration.   Instead of  having to             
     predict whether or not a given use of space will be beneﬁcial, useful,            
     orderly,  or interesting,  Flexible Spaces enable users and other sta-        
     keholders to try  new uses without  having to  commit  to them. This              
     approach circumvents the  often fear-based input  that  many stakeholders 
     bring to  conventional planning.                                                          
                                                                                                                              
5) The  persistence of  NIMBYism.  On  one hand,  we  anticipate  that
Flexible  Spaces may provoke  a  greater  level  of  NIMBYism  than
conventional  land  uses.  Their  unpredictability   might   inspire  resistance                                                                                                                   76
to such experimental sites, and will mean that they need to
be located  carefully.  On the other  hand, the  potential  to  test new
uses may help assuage NIMBY resistance to those uses if they ultimately  move off-site  to other  locations. 
By providing lived experience and feedback from neighbouring  stakeholders, Flexible Spaces
may help reduce baseless or knee-jerk opposition to  otherwise suitable uses in other locations.

6)  The failure   of  government  to  translate  planning  into  policy. By
minimizing   the government's role  in  planning, Flexible  Spaces reduces
the gap between planning and policy. Instead, activators and 
users become  temporary  policymakers.  And  while  governmental
entities  sponsoring Flexible  Spaces might  try  to  inﬂuence  which
activators  and  users have  access to those  spaces, hopefully  this
tendency will  be outweighed by the political  and social capital  that
can accrue to governmental  policy  makers by allowing   minimally
regulated,  maximally  democratic  Flexible  Spaces to serve as true
breeder-reactors for artistic, entrepreneurial, recreational, and other land use innovations.

7)  The limits  of planning  to alter existing  private property  and capital
investment.  Here again,  existing  patterns of  land  ownership  and
capital investment can create substantial barriers to  the creation of
true  Flexible Spaces. That said, the limited  duration  of tenancy inherent
to a Flexible Space means that privately held, undeveloped or
underdeveloped, land  can become a temporary Flexible Space. The
case studies discussed below provide a variety  of  examples of privately  held  property
hosting  transitory  uses  to  reinvigorate  the urban  core.
It  is  easy to  envision contexts  in  which  property  developers,
private  ﬁrms,   or  NGO's  at  least  temporarily dedicate
property as Flexible Space in order to engage in public  relations,
community   outreach,  and/or   capacity  building  with   community
stakeholders. Equally importantly,  Flexible Space empowers people
to  begin to experience community outside the  contexts of privately
or governmentally  controlled property.

Flexible  Spaces also offer   additional  advantages  over  dominant contemporary  practices:

1) Creating  space for experimentation  and  utopia.  Instead of  having
planners  or  stakeholders envision what  uses are  best for  a given
space; Flexible Space allows activators to try out different uses that
may   seem utopic,   idealistic,   and/or   otherwise   impractical.   By
minimizing  regulation, the entire  community is able to draw  on the
imagination  of  each of its  members. Thus, Flexible  Spaces enable
true  experimentation   in  land   use, in   contrast  to  contemporary
planning   which  often   limits   experimentation   to  large-scale entrepreneurship
in the name of  maximizing capital  return.

2) Eliminating the mundane abuses of procedural-participatory  planning.  
Procedural-participatory   planning  is  often  numbingly   time intensive  (Carr,  2012).
Flexible  space reduces the need for committee,  council,   planning,   and  other  meetings  that   community
members and other  stakeholders must devote hours  to,  hoping to have their   voices  heard. Instead,  communities  and  stakeholders
have an opportunity for  direct feedback – becoming and/or working directly  with   activators and  users, deciding which  uses they want
and whether  to support a given  Flexible Space use.

3)  Introducing  ﬂexibility   to  planning.  Many  of  planning's  problems 
stem from  the  permanence inherent to  its  charge. Planning  must
usually be presumed to  be, “forever”.  By introducing  transience to
planning, political  and policy  ﬂexibility  are likewise incorporated. A
given activator's approach to a Flexible Space can evolve in light of


5



     feedback from other users, community,  and stakeholders.                       


4)  Planning as a continual process. Flexible spaces have the promise to     
     render  planning  a  healthy,  creative  process in  which  there  is  a
     constant cycle  of activator  planning,  experimentation,  evaluation,              
     renewal, planning,  and experimentation.                                                   
                                                                                                                         
5)  Planning as a  source of value  to  policy  makers and stakeholders.        
     Flexible  Spaces offer a relatively  safe, low  cost space for  experimentation 
     in  innovation,  entrepreneurship, creativity,  placemaking        
     and  marketing.  Flexible  Spaces can enable  grassroots economic,       
     social,  and  environmental   development  without    the  traditional         
     limits  of large-scale, long-duration capital  investment.                             
                                                                                                                         
6)  Flexible Space can be an effective way to promote placemaking and       
     community  development. Flexible  and short-term  uses have a positive 
     impact in  connecting communities, and in linking  people with        
     places. The shared activation of a Flexible Space can empower local
     networks  because it  allows  users and  activators  to  develop new        
     bonds of communication  and trust.                                                                 
                                                                                                                         
7)  Scaling out  practices of  innovation.   While  the case studies  upon        
     which  our analysis is based are largely focused on urban, post  disruption  
     contexts we would  argue that  their lessons can potentially         
     scale out to  a  variety  of urban  public  and community   spaces, including 
     those that are not dealing with the aftermath of economic or        
     natural  disaster. The  beneﬁts of  flexible space, including  the  potential  to empower a broader range of  stakeholders while reducing        
     the  costs of experimentation  and  involvement  with   planning  can       
     potentially  apply  to  suburban,  peri-urban  and rural  open  spaces.       
     And while  flexible space approaches may not make sense for planning  infrastructure, 
     public  housing and the  like,  they can  provide        
     productive  tools for  planning parts  of housing projects,  residential        
     neighborhoods or commercial districts, giving  users the opportunity              
     to  engage in  ongoing processes of planning  and  experimentation        
     within  their  environments.                                                                         
                                                                                                                         
     These may be strong claims to make for the potential bene ﬁts of an       
approach to planning  that has yet  to be fully  attempted.  Nonetheless,       
the longstanding shortcomings of  traditional  planning  and the success      
of existing  ﬂexible  space projects – as discussed below – strongly  recommend further efforts  to try  this “third   way”.                                            
                                                                                                                         
5.  Empirical  pathways   for  Flexible  Space                                                  
                                                                                                                         
     The  foregoing  theoretical  framework  springs  from  an  increasing        
number of  case studies that support  the practicalities  and beneﬁts of        
Flexible Space. This section focuses on empirical examples of Flexible        
Space in  both:  1)  post-disaster recovery  and rebuilding   contexts  in        
Christchurch (New  Zealand) and North-eastern Japan; and  2) in  contexts of 
socio-economic transition,   exploring  the  cases of Newcastle        
(NSW, Australia) and Detroit  (Michigan,  USA). The transitional  activities 
that emerged in post-earthquake Christchurch, and the creation of        
short-term spaces in North-eastern Japan after  the 2011  tsunami, demonstrate 
the power of  Flexible Space to support communities after  a        
disaster, whereas projects in Newcastle and Detroit speak to the beneﬁts   
of ﬂexibly  repurposing vacant urban  spaces under sudden social and        
economic changes. By examining projects  which  exhibit  many of  the        
features of Flexible Space, this section explores what such spaces might     
look like while  making a case for approaches to planning that embrace             
ﬂ exibility.  These projects have fueled culturally   vibrant  development        
while  allowing  a broad  range of  individuals  to  “plan  by  doing”  free        
from the  constraints of  traditional  planning  – including  creative-class      
professionals and artists  who  often  serve as  a vanguard  for  experi-        
mentation, small  entrepreneurs, members of  cultural  and racial  min-         
ority  groups, and people left  behind or  disempowered by natural  and        

5.1.  Flexible Spaces in post-disaster recovery and rebuilding

Flexible urban  spaces have been essential for post disruption community 
recovery  and  rebuilding   as evidenced  by  the   examples of
Christchurch,  New  Zealand  and  North-eastern  Japan. Well-located,
thoughtfully  designed, safe and accessible space has been an essential
resource for  response, mobilization,  and empowerment  in post-earth-quake
Christchurch   (Dionisio&  Pawson, 2016;   Wesener, 2015).   In
North-eastern  Japan, short-term structures accommodated social amenities 
in  temporary housing areas after the 2011 tsunami,  encouraging
people to  create new social bonds amidst  displaced communities. We
focus on spatial experiments the wake of disasters because these large-scale
disruptions tend to  create unique openings and  needs within  cities,
real  estate markets, and  planning  practices  for  Flexible  Spaces (Solnit,  2009).

5.1.1.  The transitional city: Christchurch, New Zealand

Notwithstanding   the  unprecedented damage the  2010  and  2011
earthquakes in ﬂicted upon  Christchurch, its  Central  Business District
(CBD), and its residents, initial   planning responses to rebuilding  were
highly   traditional.  Reﬂecting conventional expert-led approaches, the
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) was created by the
central  government, removing  jurisdiction  over the  CBD and most affected
areas from the  Christchurch  City Council  (CCC). CERA's focus
was on creating a permanent plan for rebuilding.  In contrast, while  the                                                                                                                   77
CCC has been largely excluded from planning  the CBD's future, it  has
adopted  a procedural-participatory  approach to  planning for  the transitional,
temporary, and transient uses of spaces vacated after the
earthquakes. This approach informed the award winning ‘Share an Idea’
project, in May 2011, which  successfully gathered 106,000 responses to
the CCC's call for ideas and aspirations for the future  of Christchurch.
The conﬂict  between these two approaches in Christchurch's post-quake real-politics
has demonstrated the limits  of both.  Expert-led approaches have  dominated,
with  CERA's Central  City  Recovery Plan (CCRP) ignoring the outputs of  “Share an Idea”,
and  limiting  community  consultation or  engagement. Instead, the CCRP was expedited in a
100 day expert  led process during  which  community  vision was only
present,  if   at  all,   through   the  interpretations   of  planning   experts
(Bennett,        2014;         Dionisio&  Pawson,        2016;         Kingham,
Dionisio,&Newman,   2016).   Even so, delays  by  private  landholders,
disputes between  the  state Earthquake  Commission and  private  insurers,
and  the ponderousness of  government have,  to  date, 
largely prevented the CCRP from translating  planning into  actual  reconstruction.
And  because governmental decision  makers have hindered the implementation  of  the public  input  from  “Share an  Idea”,
the procedural-participatory approach  has likewise   failed  to  gain  traction  in Christchurch.

In contrast, ﬂexible,  grass-roots planning has started to  ﬁll the vacuum
created by the failure of both  conventional planning approaches,
providing  many of  the city's post-quake successes. 
Community groupshave temporarily  reactivated  spaces vacated by extensive demolitions
across the  city  to  address community  needs, demonstrating  the  environmental
and social value of  ﬂexible planning.  Although not always
explicitly   framed as addressing social issues, these Flexible Spaces have 
beneﬁtted Christchurch's communities by promoting  social connectedness 
and opportunities  for  food resilience,  while  inspiring  similar  initiatives  throughout  the city.
For  example, Gap Filler  – the  creators of  the Dance-O-Mat – is  a
leading   creative-led  regeneration   enterprise  advocating   short-term
transformation  of urban spaces focused on social amenities to reconnect
the  people with the city  (Gap Filler, 2016; Wesener, 2015). 
Their other signiﬁcant projects include the Pallet Pavilion – a short-term venue for
cultural  and social activities,  built   of wooden  pallets – and  the Commons,
a space for  collaborative  work on  different temporary projects



6



and public  events, managed and organized by  community  and social        
justice groups.  The Commons  regularly  hosts food  trucks,  a bicycle         
maintenance shop, and other small local businesses and NGO's. Smaller    their  
Gap Filler initiatives  include  the Think  Differently  Book Exchange, an        
old refrigerator  transformed into  a shared community  lending library;         
and the Painted Piano project, which  makes old pianos publicly  available 
in  vacant spaces across the city (Gap Filler,  2016).  These short-term projects  
are widely  acclaimed,  highly  used, and help  reconnect communities and the  city, 
while  empowering  local networks  by reducing investment risks to participating in small local businesses. 
                       
     Similarly,  Greening  the Rubble  has been creating  short-term gardens 
and pocket parks in empty spaces throughout the city for over ﬁve       
years. Working with local authorities,  organisations, builders, sponsors,       
and landowners  Greening the  Rubble  has created amenities  as play        
parks,  urban   farms,  and   green  patches   (Wesener,  2015).   While        
ephemeral, these  projects  have demonstrated  that  ﬂexibly   creating        
urban space with  the support  and collaboration  of  local  stakeholders       
can provide tangible  environmental  and social value  to communities,         
and give those long  denied a meaningful  voice in  planning an  opportunity  to “plan by doing”.                                                                                

     For example, The Kākano Café and Cookery School (Fig. 1)  brings        

Māori  food  and  cultural  traditions   into  the  community,   while  supporting people to grow,  
harvest, and cook food in healthier  ways. This        
Flexible space is led by a  local Māori  mother of  ﬁve,  Jade Temepara,       
with  the support  of her family   and close friends. It  focuses on family         
wellbeing, community  empowerment, and better social connectedness.            
     The success of these projects, however, has not happened in  a vacuum. 
The systematic  creation of  ﬂexible  spaces in Christchurch  has       
depended on support provided by Life in  Vacant Spaces (LiVS). Fitting      
our de ﬁnition of  “administrators”,  LiVS develops connections, and assists 
with the negotiations  between landowners of vacant land and activators  (Dionisio&  Pawson, 2016;  Wesener, 2015).  
LiVS  also  helps different types of activators to implement ideas for the temporary use of     
vacant open spaces (Life In  Vacant  Spaces, 2016). The LiVS website        
provides resources for the development of  ﬂexible spaces, such as use     
license agreements, building consents, and information  on small  business 
funding and regulation (Life In Vacant Spaces, 2016). Since 2012,       
LiVS has mediated the development of a signi ﬁcant number of projects,      
including  The Kākano Café and the ‘Nature  Play Park’, an interactive         
natural space in which  LiVS, negotiated between CERA as landowner,       
and ‘Greening the Rubble’  as activator. Similarly,  LiVS has supported                                                                                                                  
and  facilitated  the ‘Inconvenience Store’— a  conceptual shop and art
space where customers can get items and local produce in exchange for
time – and Dorothy's Tea Room, a mobile British style tearoom. In
so doing, LiVS' work as an administrator  is essential to enabling short-term
transient, and mobile  uses of spaces.

5.1.2.  Flexibility  of  spaces use for  social  connectedness: North-eastern

Japan

The post-tsunami recovery  in  North-eastern Japan has been characterized by
tensions between top-down  and community  driven  paradigms for reconstruction.
The Japanese government has a long tradition of  relying   on   technological, 
industrial and  engineering-based  approaches to  risk management and post-disaster reconstruction,  which
often    fail    to    account    for    social   considerations    (Puppim    de
Oliveira &   Fra.Paleo, 2016). For  example, soon after  the  2011  earth-quake 
and tsunami, the government began constructing sea walls in the
most affected prefectures in North-eastern Japan, while  many affected
communities opposed this approach. Sea walls negatively impact local
ecology, and  hinder  the  relation  between built  environment  and  sea
(Dionisio&  Pawson, 2016).  Rejecting  resolute,  heavy, high-tech,  engineered
government solutions, local communities have instead focused on community  needs,
emphasizing  soft measures and  tactical  interventions, 
featuring  shared, collaborative, and  ﬂexible schemes of construction and management.
Ishinomaki  2.0 was created by local residents from a broad range of 
backgrounds to  support   community  and  businesses in  coping  with
temporary   displacement and  in  restoring  livelihoods   in  Ishinomaki,
Miyagi   Prefecture, after   the  2011  tsunami.  The  project  focuses on
Ishinomaki Chuo shopping  street, by linking  businesses that lost their
venues in  the tsunami  with  owners of  vacant spaces (Ishinomaki  2.0
Archives,  2012).  As an  “administrator”,   Ishinomaki   2.0 has  also facilitated
the  conversion of unoccupied  spaces into community spaces,
and the  creation of  shared business management schemes that enable
people  to create  and run  new enterprises. In  the initial   stages of the
project,  the negotiation process focused in talking with landowners, and
advocating the  importance of  opening up vacant  spaces, garages, and
unutilized  areas for reactivation by the very kinds of residents often left
without  a voice  in traditional,  top-down  government disaster relief  efforts.
Further,  Ishinomaki  2.0 worked  to  develop sharing  schemes to
beneﬁt different parties,  based  on  collaboration,   cooperation   and
partnership  between  local  NGOs, landowners   and  residents. These




                                                                                                   



                                                                                                                   78

7

                                                                                                                                                        Fig. 2. Irori Café, Ishinomaki, Japan, September 2016.
                                                                                                                                                        Photography: courtesy of Irori Café.






projects have been so successful and valued that the local community         
has committed to continuing  this  model for  solving future  community        
problems rather than  returning to  “business as usual” (Ishinomaki  2.0
Archives, 2012).
                                                                                                                         
     Ishinomaki  2.0′s most successful space conversion projects include
the Irori  Cafe (Fig.  2) and the  Fukkou Minpaku  accommodation. The                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
owner of a  cafe destroyed in the tsunami.  Offering inexpensive coffee                                                                                                                         
and tea, free Wi-Fi  access, electricity, books and  magazines, the Café                                                                                                                         
has  become  an  important    rendezvous  space  for   the  community                                                                                                                        
(Ishinomaki  2.0 Archives, 2012).  Similarly,  an  empty building   in the                                                                                                                        
city  center was converted  into  a new  accommodation space, Fukkou                                                                                                                        
Minpaku,   to   host  visitors   and   volunteers  coming   to   Ishinomaki                                                                                                                        
(Ishinomaki 2.0  Archives, 2012).  It has simultaneously  contributed to                                                                                                                         
the  local  economy while   addressing the  lack  of  short-term   accommodation in  North-eastern Japan.
                                                                                                                         
     The  Ishinomaki  2.0  project  has also  enabled  shared schemes of                                                                                                               
business management and temporary tenancy. The Reconstruction Bar                                                                                                                         
was built  soon after the  tsunami, providing  space to experiment  with                                                                                                                         
temporary  management. Each weekday has  a different  management                                                                                                                         
team and anyone in the  community can  be a temporary manager – in        
the manner of  a Flexible  Space “activator”  (Ishinomaki  2.0  Archives,
2012). This experiment  has established social and entrepreneurial  relationships 
between residents and neighbors  within  the affected  comunities, promoting 
new local  business ventures. Ishinomaki 2.0  also       
facilitated a  space sharing between two small businesses, a traditional             
kimono shop, Kameshichi, which survived  the tsunami, and a business       
owner who  lost his café in  the disaster. To  this day, the  Café and Kimono Shop share the same establishment, a symbiosis, attracting young     
people to the café and elder customers to the kimono shop. This allowed     
the café owner to rapidly recover his business, and allowed the kimono        
shop to sub-let part of its  establishment to attract  new customers.               
     Similarly,  Home-for-All  (Minna  no Ie),  creates social amenities for        
communities living in  temporary housing areas in North-Eastern Japan.      
All  projects center  around small  buildings,  up to  60m2,  that  can be        
quickly built  with  few  resources and are exempted from building  consents 
(Dionisio& Pawson, 2016; Domus web, 2012). Most Home-for-All        
buildings offer  spaces for communities to meet and reconnect, such as       
shelters, child care spaces or recreation centers. The construction of the           
small facilities  often  integrates  strong engagement and collaboration         
                                                                                  
from  the  community,  while  the  management is based on  
shared co-operation  schemes with local stakeholders.

5.2. Flexible Spaces in socio-economic shifts

Like  disasters, chronic stressors such as environmental,  socio-cultural,
and economic changes often pose unprecedented challenges that
call for  the reutilization,   re-appropriation,  and reinterpretation   of vacant urban space. 
Under conditions of “creative  destruction”,(Harvey, 2006) many city spaces become underutilized, obsolete, or abandoned,
offering new opportunities  for  experimental, innovative,  and  creative
uses. Unlike  disasters, however, conditions  of  economic  distress are
often characterized  by  the lack  of  and/or  ineffectiveness  of existing
systems of planning,  which  are typically   contingent  upon capital  investment and tax  based resources. 
Lacking an effective  conventional planning regime, the  decline of the mining  sector in  Newcastle (NSW, Australia),
and the deindustrialization  of Detroit  (Michigan, USA)
have forced local  communities to  explore the  potential of re-purposing
vacant space to revive  their  neighborhoods,  prioritizing   the  needs of
communities  while   enhancing  social   empowerment  and  resilience (Dionisio&  Pawson, 2016).

5.2.1. Reinventing urbanity  through  ﬂexible  appropriations:  Newcastle (NSW, Australia)

The  economy of  Newcastle was  heavily  dependent on  steel production
and  coal mining   until  the  late  1980s, when  both  industries rapidly declined. 
Jobs  disappeared  and   residents  left   for other Australian cities,
leaving  Newcastle with a surplus of empty  shops and offices.  Ironically,  the  economic  downturn,  combined  with   Sydney's
proximity   and greater  attractiveness for   investment, effectively   pre-served Newcastle's
unique architectural   and natural  features by  pre-cluding  redevelopment,  leaving the  deserted city  center
an unintentional   monument to  the history  of  Australian city  making  (Westbury, 2015). 
Throughout  the  2000s, the  city  center's stagnation  continued 
due  to lack of investment, property  speculation and other  constraints,
notwithstanding  the  demands  of  communities  and property   owners
facing devalued assets (Westbury, 2015).
Against this backdrop, administrator  Renew Newcastle was founded
in  2008 to  facilitate  the  creation  of short  and medium  term  uses for
empty properties  in  Newcastle's city   center, ‘to  generate  activity  in


                                                                                                                   79

8

                                                                                                                                                                     Fig. 3. Renew Newcastle Map, Newcastle, Australia,
                                                                                                                                                                     December 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                   Image: courtesy of Renew Newcastle.




















buildings   until   that    future   long   term   activity    happens’  
Newcastle, 2016). The  organization  was initiated  by  a local  resident        
with experience in public  events, and focused on attracting small local        
entrepreneurial and  creative groups  and individuals   because of their        
continuous need for space and their willingness  to undertake the  risks       
of short term occupation. After several years spent identifying legal and       
planning  barriers,  Renew Newcastle developed a  negotiation  framework to  
match property owners with  activators,  providing  licences for        
use (rolling 30 days term), that minimize opportunity  costs to owners in       
case conventional commercial  tenants appear.  Renew Newcastle has        
provided  new, temporary  occupants with   the  opportunity  to  experiment, 
trial,  and establish activities  that possibly would  never occur in         
space subject to  market  rates, facilitating   the  implementation  of  55              
temporary uses by community  groups and cultural  enterprises, among       
others (Fig.  3)  – including  a  flexible space theatre,  which  is widely         
available for  productions  lasting  between one day  and 8 weeks. And        
while  much of  Renew Newcastle's focus has been  on arts  and small        
business development, it  has succeeded in engaging a wide  range of        
new activators who  would  not  have otherwise become involved  with         
planning or  development in  Newcastle. Reﬂecting the success of this       
approach, some temporary licences have been converted to long  term        
commercial  leases, attracting  new  businesses into  the  area.  Renew       
Newcastle has helped make the city center  a vibrant  place with  small        
businesses, events, and street  activities,   while   attracting  designers,       
photographers, and artists (Westbury,  2015). As Westbury  notes, ‘our        
cities aren't simply  grand projects and mega visions; they are the  con-       
stellation of small acts and activities’ (Westbury, 2015, p. 13). At a time        
when many smaller cities are struggling, projects like Renew Newcastle       
suggest that Flexible Spaces can provide suitable solutions by enabling            
such “small acts and activities”–short   and medium  term uses that can       
help offset  economic decline  while  empowering  local  creative, community and  cultural groups.                                                                            
                                                                                                                         

5.2.2. Reconnecting  communities  by   repurposing  the   city:    Detroit       

(Michigan, USA)                                                                                              

     Because of the dominance of the ‘Big  Three’ automakers – General       
Motors, Ford, and Chrysler – over the economy of the Detroit  area and       
Michigan as a whole, the  deindustrialization  of the 90′s  drastically remade 
an area that had not needed to diversify since the 1930s (Padnani,    
2013). Approximately  3 million   jobs were lost  in the  North American         
(Renew       automotive  industry – mostly in the greater Detroit region – after nearly
two decades of ﬁnancial struggle and the 2009 bankruptcies of GM and
Chrysler  (Vlasic, 2011). As a result, about 240,000  people left Detroit,
and  approximately   100,000  homes and  lots  are  currently   deserted
(Suburban  Stats, 2015).  This socio-economic shift  has disadvantaged
those who  were forced to leave as well  as those who have stayed in a
city  facing  physical and social  destruction, broken  community  bonds,
and crushing ﬁnancial struggles (Seelye, 2011). Vacant urban lots now
represent 20% of  all urban  properties in  Detroit.  In response, the city
council  has been acquiring  some of  these vacant properties  and has
slated  approximately  10,000 empty  buildings  for  demolition  (Seelye, 2011).
As in Christchurch,  Newcastle, and North-eastern Japan, an abundance 
of available  urban space and a need to empower existing urban
residents have created openings and demands for inventive repurposing
of vacant land.  Urban farming, art  spaces, and social amenities are the
most  common re-appropriations,  claimed  and  managed by residents,
community   groups  and  activists.  In  East Detroit,   the  Planning  and
Development Department  is offering  to  sell residents adjacent vacant
lots,  often for  a few  hundred dollars.  Residents of nearby vacant  lots
often already use such spaces for gardening, play, or beautifying  their
neighborhoods (AlHajal, 2012). While enabling new uses, these Flexible
spaces tend to share a focus on social justice, connectedness, and livability  
among  economically  marginalized  communities.  In  particular,
urban  farming has become one  of the  best known  types of  re-appropriation
of vacant land in Detroit,  enabling over 1000 small community gardens and uplifting
local economy, through  projects  like Farmway, Earthworks, and D-Town Farm (Gallagher, 2015;  Tostes, 2012).

In   Brightmoor,   Northwest  Detroit,   a   group  of  residents  called
‘Neighbors Building  Brightmoor’  (NBB)  have focused on re-appropriation
as the  key  to  improved  urban  livability,    crime  reduction,  and
creation  of  neighborhood-wide   opportunities  to  work   together. The
group works  to  enhance the  community  capacity  of local  families  –
many  of whom  are economically  at-risk –  based on a grass roots, democratic
decision making  model. Among  the projects  the community 
has prioritized  is  the creation  and maintenance of small  pocket parks
and  urban  gardens,  while   providing  opportunities   to  involve   local
children   and  teenagers (Neighbors  Building  Brightmoor,   2016).  By
engaging  with  landowners,  residents, and  the local  government,  the
NBB has  enabled a  variety   of  ﬂexible  appropriations  including   an
                                                                                                                   80

9



abandoned   house  transformed    into  playhouse,    urban  gardens   managed          
by  residents,   and   market   gardens   to  assist  residents   in   generating    income  
through   farming    produce   (Rock,   2012).   Linked   by  a natural    corridor   along  the  Rouge  River, 
these  spaces  have  engendered   grass-roots           
growth    of  the   local    economy   and   community      connectedness   within            
Brightmoor,    helping    offset  the  structural    disadvantage    of  its  residents.           
      Similarly,    Earthworks     Urban  Farm   was  developed   by   Capuchins,   a         
local   religious    organization,     which    repurposed    1 ha   of  vacant    urban          
land  to grow   organic   produce  (Earthworks    Urban   Farm,  2016).   Another           
urban  agriculture     project,   D-Town   Farm   was  developed   by  the  Detroit
Black  Community     Food  Security   Network,    an  organization     focused  on          
food   justice   and   community      development     within    the   city's    African-
American    communities     (D-Town    Farm,   2016).    Utilizing     3 ha  of   previously   
vacant    urban   space  for   community     agriculture,      The  D-Town                                                                                                                                                         
Farm   is  also   one  of   the   biggest   urban   farms    in   Detroit.    Both   these                
projects   are  exemplars    of  consensus   building     among   communities     to          
enable  re-appropriations     that  have  ﬂexible   management,   to  support   and                                                                                                                                                          
empower   particularly     disfranchised    groups  through   the  production    and                                                                                                                                                
sale  of   farming    produce.    Moreover,    they   both    promote    intergenerational  
activities,    bringing    children,   teenagers,  adults,   and  elderly   people                
to meet   and  work   together.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
      Reﬂecting  the  power    of  ﬂexible,   community     driven,    experimental                  
spaces to  re-establish    a sense  of  community    and  place,   connectedness,           
and  social  cohesion,   these  projects    have  enabled   informal    self-governance 
among  the  largely   impoverished    Eastern  neighborhoods    of  Detroit.           
And  while   driven   by  communities'     need  to  manage  ongoing   social   and                
economic   crises,   these   ﬂexible    uses  have   also  empowered    people    to                                                                                                                                                        
experiment    and   intervene    in   their   neighborhoods,      prompting     appropriation   
as  a deeper   practice   of  belonging.                                                                    
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                
6.  Conclusion:      towards    a  world    of  Flexible     Space                                                
                                                                                                                                                
      While    communities     will    undoubtedly     continue     to   create   ﬂexible                                                                                                                                                        
spaces when   confronted    with   disasters,   economic   disruptions,    or  other                                                                                                                                          
events  rending    the  urban   fabric,   we   believe   it  would    be  a mistake    to                
only  treat  ﬂexible    space as a “worst    case scenario”   solution.   Rather,   the          
lessons  from    successful   community     driven    ﬂexible   space   projects   in                                                                                                                                                       
places  like   Detroit,    Christchurch,    Newcastle,    and  North-eastern     Japan          
can be  applied   in   a variety    of  different  and  non-disrupted     contexts.   In                
short,  we  should   begin   to  treat  Flexible   Space  as a  true  “third    way”   to                                                                                                                                                         
plan  –  or  supplement    existing    approaches   to   planning    –  given  its   capacity   
to   encourage   innovation,      development,     and/or    the   empowerment  
of  those  often   excluded   from   meaningful     decision   making   under                                                                                                                                                         
conventional    planning    approaches.                                                                                  
      Indeed,   a  growing     number   of   communities     and   governments    are               
beginning   to  embrace  ﬂexible  space planning    in non-disrupted     contexts.                                                                                                                                                          
For  example,   several   cities   in  Europe   are  starting   to   capitalize   on   the         
opportunities    provided    by  incremental    and  temporary,    community    and                 
individual-led,     projects   for   city  making.    ‘Restaurant   Day’   was  initiated                                                                                                                                                          
in  2011  in   Helsinki    (Finland)    promoting    pop-up   restaurants,    in  which                                                                                                                                         
anyone   can  have   their    own   food   business   for  one   day,   in   public   or          
community    spaces, or  even  in  people's   homes  and  offices  (#Restaurant                   
Day,  2011).   In   only   ﬁve   years,  the   initiative     has  been  adopted   in   75                                                                                                                                                         
countries,   with    over   1  million    participants     organising    restaurants.    Similarly,   
Park(ing)    Day  in San  Francisco  repurposes   metered   car parking                 
spaces,  ﬁlling    them   with   such   amenities   as  patches   of  grass,  outdoor                                                                                                                                                  
furniture,    and  small   playgrounds    with   participants     paying   the  parking                  
meter  (Tostes,   2012).                                                                                                          
      Implementing     Flexible   Space  as a  third   way   of  planning,    however,                                                                                                                                                        
raises  a number   of  essential   questions.   More   research  is  needed  to  un-          
derstand   the   contexts    and   locations    in   which    ﬂexible    spaces   might                
provide   the  most  bene ﬁts,   how  best  to  structure,    incentivize,    regulate,                                                                                                                                                       
and  enable  ﬂexible  spaces,  and  what   kinds  of  elements   go  into  making           
truly   effective    planning    interventions     through    ﬂexible    space  creation.                 
Indeed,  the  very  nature   of  our  case studies  –  namely  successful   projects                                                                                                                                                         
in post-disruption     contexts   – suggests  the  need  for  additional    work   that
interrogates     the   possibilities     for    ﬂexible    space   projects   
beyond    disrupted   and/or    dense urban   environments.
Of  course,  one of  the  greatest  barriers   to conducting    such  research  is
the  need  for   actual   ﬂexible   space  experiments    to  use  as  the  basis  for
further   examination.     And  if these  experiments   are  to truly   take  hold   and
produce   beneﬁts  for  communities    outside   areas  of disruption,     planners,
planning    educators,   activists,   policy   makers,   and  city   managers  among
others   will   need  to  embrace   the  very   powerful    opportunities
and  beneﬁts  that  ﬂexible    spaces can  offer.


                                                                                                                                   81

10                                                                                                                                                     82

