1






2




Learning from temporary use and the making of on-demand communities in London’s Olympic “fringes”






    ABSTRACT
                                                                                          
Community-oriented temporary uses are a subset of interim use in vacant urban spaces, alongside creative and commercial practices.  
Its proponents argue that they  can inform more incremental and residents-led local urban development. Underurban austerity, however, 
temporary uses can become vehicles for the short-term and conditional delivery of social beneﬁts. In this paper, I analyse a community-oriented  
interim  use project  commissioned by  a public development body  as part of  the  London 2012 Olympic Games urban  regeneration program. 
Drawing upon  policy analysis and interviews with planners, policymakers, architects and community members,  
I unravel  competing   discourses, positions,  power dynamics and temporalities, and their relationship to the Games’ legacy. 
The paper contributes to debates about the normalization of temporary urbanism and pop-up geographies in times of urban austerity, 
shedding light on the potential long-term implications of the logic of “on-demand communities” in urban development and planning.


KEYWORDS
London 2012 Olympic Games; 
interim uses;
on-demand communities;
pop-up geographies;
urban regeneration



Introduction

Short-term   commercial    and  noncommercial    uses of   vacant  buildings   and  land   have
always been  part  of  the  cultural   and economic   landscape  of  cities;  however,  it  is  only
recently that  temporary   uses have come to the  foreground  as a distinctive   interdisciplinary ﬁeld  
of practice  between architecture,  the  arts, planning  and  policymaking   (Haydn &
Temel, 2006; Bishop  and  Williams,   2012; Henneberry,  2017).  Within   this  ﬁeld,  community-led    
spontaneous    (Deslandes,   2013)    and   unplanned    (Oswalt,    Overmeyer,    &
Misselwitz,   2013)  approaches  to   transforming    the  city   sit  alongside,   and  have  been
increasingly   supplanted    by,   more   institutional     and   planned    interim    use   schemes
(Andres,  2013; Madanipour,   2018)  promoted   and funded  by  national  and  local  governments  and  organizations.   
As  temporary   and  interim   projects   become accepted  policy tools for   urban  regeneration  (Reynolds,  2011),  
critical   urban  scholarship  has  identiﬁed a signiﬁcant    alignment   of   temporary   use  
policies  with the  neoliberal discourse and practices  of  “creative   cities”   (Mould,   2014;  Harris,   2015;  Peck,  2011),  particularly    at
times of  high  vacancy  linked  to  the  global  ﬁnancial  crisis  of  2008 (Tonkiss,   2013). The




3
2    


proliferation of temporary projects has been celebrated as a manifestation of grassroots
“tactical urbanism”  and makeshift  approaches. To critics, however, the inclusion  of
interim uses and projects in urban  policy has transformed them into  a strategic tool,
belonging to the “new vernacular” of post-recession Creative City policymaking (Harris,
2015; Mould, 2014). Interim uses have been used as tools for urban place marketing,
aimed at gaining competitive advantage in dynamics of inter-urban competition and as
such can be seen to markanew “urban frontier” in processes of privatization and market-
led urban redevelopment (Colomb, 2012a, 2012b).
    Supporters of temporary uses of vacant spaces have contrasted these critiques by
reclaiming their potential as sites for experimenting with socially and environmentally
progressive urban practice. The arguments often highlight how temporary uses, both
formal and informal,  can promote  alternative social, architectural and political urban
practice, transforming the ways in which cities are imagined and produced. To socially-engaged 
architects and urban design practitioners, temporary uses can enable the production 
of more environmentally sustainable and participatory ways of designing, delivering
and organizing space (AAA, 2007; Petcou & Petrescu, 2015). From short-term urban
gardening to social projects in large vacant buildings, and from institutional commissions
to community-run initiatives and social enterprises, the blurring of boundaries between
traditional interim uses and more participatory and transformative ways of spatial production may be 
“a key characteristic of temporary urbanism” (Bishop &Williams, 2012,p.6).
Shifting the focus, some scholars have opted for a thematic approach based on what users
do: reclaiming, transgressing, contesting, appropriating, uncovering, pluralizing (Hou,
2010). The dichotomy between temporary and permanent has also been challenged. In
her analysis of temporary uses of vacant spaces in Berlin, Karen Till proposes the term
“interim  space”, placing the focus on  the ways in  which  urban initiatives, and  their
communities, evolve and exist in the ﬂuid space-times of the city (2011). The position of
local users and communities is therefore key to understanding the potential for promoting
projects that are more responsive to local needs and resources (Till & McArdle, 2016).
Examining community involvement is central to the promise of informing  local urban
development and policymaking, and can bring to light underlying assumptions, concerns
and even contradictory value claims.
    In this paper, I analyze the imagined and actual role of community-led interim uses
through the study of the commissioning of a temporary youth center on a vacant plot of
land, as part of interim use programs in the areas surrounding the London 2012 Olympic
Games site. The paper aims to contribute to debates about the emergence of temporary
urbanism and  pop-up  urban  geographies at times of  austerity  (Harris,  2015), and
speciﬁcally about the potentially  long-term  implications  of  temporary  community-oriented 
projects for local urban development. By contrasting temporary use mechanisms 
and the promise of long-term social beneﬁts, it raises signiﬁcant questions about the
normative and exclusionary logic of “on-demand community” in neighborhoods already
characterized by social deprivation.


Interim   uses, austerity   and  “on  demand”    communities

Debates around the role of interim and temporary uses of vacant land and buildings have
come to the forefront since the global ﬁnancial crisis and subsequent diffusion of forms of

4


“austerity urbanism” (Peck, 2012; Tonkiss, 2013). Vacant spaces have been argued to be
key sites from which to understand forms of urbanization emerging from the territorializing 
of the global ﬁnancial crisis (O’Callaghan, Di Feliciantonio, & Byrne, 2018) and
the practices that inhabit them, which can offer important insights into shifts in governance 
and political responses (García-Lamarca, 2015; Martínez & García, 2015). Scholars
engaged with new urban practices under austerity have highlighted how temporary uses
become practical and symbolic sites of negotiations across a range of institutional and
non-institutional stakeholders (Jimenez, 2014). In a broader revaluation of “makeshift”
urban practices (Marrero-Guillamón, 2014a) as spaces of incremental and processual city
making, it has been argued that temporary uses of vacant spaces can become devices for
experimentation, collective learning and  urban prototyping  (Ziehl  &  Oßwald,  2015;
Madanipour, 2018). In post-2008 Dublin, Till  and McArdle  have proposed the notion
of improvisional city to encompass the creative modus operandi as a “making do” with
what is available (Till & McArdle,  2016). In their analysis of temporary uses of vacant
spaces through artistic and social projects, they stress the transformational potential of
such practices and their radical openness to engagement with place. The improvisional
city emerging through often short-term practices highlights the possibility of non-market
base values and of coming together to “share responsibility for place-caring and social
sustainability” (Till &  McArdle, 2016, p. 47).
    The sharing of responsibilities and the transformative potential of social interim uses
requires careful analysis of the conditions within   which they  develop, as well as the
agendas of the different actors and power relations. As argued by Lauren Andres in her
comparative study of Lausanne and Marseille, temporary  uses have the potential of
transforming   urban   development   dynamics  toward    more   community-oriented
approaches (Andres, 2013). To assess this potential, however, it is necessary to analyze
the speciﬁc distribution  of  power between sets of stakeholders in  the emergence of
“multistage governance arrangements” (Andres, 2013, p. 760). In British cities affected
by decreasing public spending, the question becomes particularly signi ﬁ cant with regards
to the role of community groups and voluntary organizations in the design and delivery
of public  services (Featherstone, Ince, Mackinnon, Strauss, & Cumbers, 2012). Local
authorities becoming “agents of austerity” have been argued to engender new partnerships 
and collaborations with  service users and civil  society groups as part of  their
strategies for managing and administering budget cuts (Penny, 2017). Greater responsibility 
of  users and civil society groups in the maintaining  social programs at times of
shrinking local budgets has been argued to belong to a shifting urban entrepreneurship
agenda at times of recession and austerity (Lauermann, 2018).
    A critical  stance toward community involvement in temporary uses demands atten-
tion to  the temporalities of participation in  the design and delivery of interim  uses as
a signi ﬁcant component of the power relations at play  (Tonkiss, 2013). Community-oriented 
temporary uses place the emphasis on the involvement of users in some or all
phases of the projects. Tactical forms of organizing in emerging “pop-up geographies”,
however, rely on the mobilization  of users at short notice and for  short or  uncertain
periods of time. Borrowing a concept from studies in ﬂexible and casual labor, the logic of
temporary uses parallels that of “on-demand” labor (Malin & Chandler, 2016), based on
notions of networked connectivity that presupposes both mobility and ﬂexibility (Ferreri,
2015). As has been argued by Blokland and Savage, ideals of networked urbanism often

5



neglect to consider barriers to participation and  the privileging of  exclusionary social
capital that  exacerbate, rather than  address, existing social and  spatial inequalities
(Blokland & Savage, 2008). Interim uses produce normative narratives about individuals
and groups engaging in community-led social provision at times of budget reductions
and the push toward entrepreneurialism. Complying with logics of “on-demand” connectivity to 
partake of the social benefits of the Games’ legacy raises wider questions
about conditionality  of  welfare in   urban redevelopment after  sporting  mega-events
(Paton, 2018) and the normalization of “the idea that some claims to space are provisional 
and temporary” (Harris, 2015, p. 595).
    In  this paper, I understand community-oriented  temporary urban projects as produced 
through power relations accompanied by competing agendas and value claims articulated by policy actors, 
professionals, residents and community groups. To offer a thick account of these relations and claims, 
I draw on discourse analysis of key planning policy documents, participant observations and in-depth and repeated interviews with
officers from the London Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC) and key individuals
directly involved in different stages of setting up the temporary community center. 1
                                                                                                                                The
paper is organized as follows: in the ﬁrst two sections I present an overview of the history
and context  of the  interim  use agendas in  the area surrounding  the  London  2012
Olympic main site. In these, I show how interim use programs were used by the LLDC
to promote  connectivity  between existing and new  neighborhoods, and to  generate
“testing sites” for design agendas and the wider regeneration objectives. I then zoom in
on the  case study of a  youth-oriented temporary  community  hub in  order  to  offer
detailed examination of the tensions that emerged in the implementation of the design
and development agendas. Building on local concerns and observations, I highlight how
existing social and  spatial inequalities  intersected with  the  dynamics of  temporary
commissioning and the  outsourcing of  risk. I  discuss the elusive longer-term  social
beneﬁts allegedly to be achieved through interim uses, and draw out the wider implications 
of an “on-demand” logic  of community participation.  In the  concluding section,
I argue that community-oriented interim uses should be understood as a highly problematic vehicle 
for delivering the social beneﬁts of urban regeneration, whose conditionality on compliance with a “pop-up” 
logic risks furthering  existing social and spatial marginalization.


“Stitching   the  fringes”    before  and  after  the  Olympics

As has been widely argued, the Olympic bid was publicly justiﬁed through the promise of
regenerating a derelict and neglected area of East London. The discourse of post-Olympic
legacy beneﬁtted from a long-term portrayal of the Lower Lea Valley and its surrounding
urban areas, spanning three different London boroughs, as an urban “edgeland” (Davis,
2016; Davis & Thornley, 2010). As early as 2005, the Valley was identiﬁed as a strategic
area for  urban development, as demonstrated by  the  establishment of the  London
Thames Gateway Development Corporation (LTGDC) (Poynter, 2009). In 2012, some
of  the  LTGDC’s   functions  and  assets were  taken  over  by   the  London  Legacy
Development Corporation  (LLDC),  which replaced the  Olympic  Delivery Authority
and the  Olympic  Park  Legacy Company. As  London’s ﬁrst   Mayoral Development
Corporation, it  was tasked with planning and delivering the legacy of the Games and

6



combined functions and powers of its predecessors, such as the assembly and management 
of vacant land, with new powers inherited from local government. This included
the responsibility for local planning well beyond the boundaries of the Queen Elizabeth
Olympic Park  (QEOP), including  Hackney Wick  and  Fish Island,  from  which it is
separated by the Lee Navigation canal.
    Temporary projects have had a longer trajectory as urban design tools in the areas
within  and adjacent to  the Games’ main site, with   deep roots in  the history  of the
organization and its  staffing. Many  officers in  the  LLDC  had previously  worked at
Design for London, a team within the Greater London Authority  that played a central
role in the development of an  urban policy  discourse around temporary uses in the
capital, under the leadership of Peter Bishop (see Bishop & Williams, 2012). After the
disbandment of Design for London, several planning and urban design officers moved to
the Olympic Park LegacyCompany and then to the LLDC, in what one of them described
as a “transfer of team” (Interview,  15 July 2014). The continuity of  approach to local
development and introduction   of  socially-oriented  temporary  projects in  planning
derived from their  previous experience in the area, particularly through a program of
small-scale architectural, planning and design interventions in the  areas adjacent the
QEOP, as surveyed in the publication Stitching the Fringes: Working around the Olympic
Park (Design for London, 2013). The program spanned ﬁve areas: to the west of the Park,
Hackney Marshes, Hackney  Wick   and Bromley-by-Bow;  to  the  east,  Leyton and
Stratford. Interventions varied and ranged from  physical improvements in the public
realm and green landscaping to pop-up reuse of front shops and the establishment of new
venues for the arts and creative industries, such as the White Building, in Hackney Wick.
    In the publication, the Lower Lea Valley was described as a “tear in London’s fabric”
which required “stitching” through targeted interventions on the landscape (Design for
London, 2013, p. 15). The overall pro-growth purpose of the program was clearly stated in
the Mayor of London’s Forward to the document, which described local development in
these areas as “central” to the  realization of the  “real  promise” of  the 2012 Games:
neighborhoods such as HackneyWick and Fish Island “must grow and improve in parallel
with those in the [Olympic]  Park. [They] cannot feel like they are on the edge, looking
across at something new. Instead theymustbe a central partof the transformation”(Design
for London,  2013, p. 4). In  this way, naming the  entire area as “fringes” discursively
constituted it as peripheral in two ways; in relation to the city’s core, and, more locally,
to the Olympic main redevelopment site. The metaphor of “stitching” extended beyond
physical redevelopment to its residents who were presumed to be both spatially and socially
disconnected. In urban regeneration discourse, depictions that devalue existing residents
and spatialuses is a common mechanism used by both public and private agencies to justify
the need for redevelopment, generating marginalization and territorial stigmatization of
working class spaces such as formerly industrial areas and council housing estates (Slater,
2018). The production of spatial stigmatization has been a common feature in redevelopment 
through mega-sport events (Paton, 2018); in the run-up to the London 2012 Olympic
bid, it has been argued that the marginalization of inhabitants and prior uses of the Lower
LeaValley had suited arguments in favor of the compulsory purchase of land andproperty,
including of publicly-accessible private land such as the Manor garden allotments (Davis&
Thornley, 2010; Raco& Tunney, 2010).

7



    The “stitching” metaphor persisted in the LLDC’s approach toward the neighborhood
surrounding the main site, and in the justiﬁcation for  promoting temporary uses, after
the Games. In the words of an officer, the key purpose of commissioning interim uses was
about “trying  to  make it   all feel like  one  place rather than  two  places” (Interview,
15 July 2014). In this phase, the LLDC commissioned and supported temporary uses
through calls for proposals and small-scale funding aimed at so-called as Grass-roots
Interim  Uses Projects (London  Legacy Development Corporation  [LLDC],   London
Legacy Development Corporation, 2014), most of which were to be placed around new
mobility  infrastructures, which included the development of public  transport links  as
well as green pathways and the construction of new bridges. Strategically located temporary uses 
played both a practical and a symbolic role of bridging across areas that had
been separated from the main site by an insurmountable and heavily militarized fence:
“those are routes that are unfamiliar at the moment  and that need to become part of
people’s local mental map of the place and by lining these routes we can shorten the
distance, the sort of mental distance, between here [Hackney Wick] and here [Queen
Elizabeth Olympic Park]” (Interview,  15 July 2014). Small urban design interventions
were meant to involve community groups in the development of activities and projects
that animated new landscapes and signpost new paths (Ferreri & Trogal, 2018). Beyond
this spatial use, in the early phases of the post-Olympic legacy interim uses were also
deployed, for  the ﬁrst  time,  as “testing  sites” for  community-oriented  activities,  as
I examine in more detail below.



Learning from others: interim uses as urban “testing sites”

The idea of deploying community-oriented interim uses as planning and policy “testing
sites” was a key component in the local development strategies of the LLDC. In 2012, the
Corporation commissioned a series of research reports from a range of organizations and
researchers titled Learning from  Others (London  Legacy Development Corporation,
2012). The 7-volume publication was delivered in  2013 for  internal distribution  and
policy guidance, and covered a range of  topics  such as “Live Art   and Performance
Projects”,  “Delivery   and   Financial   Models   for   Interim    Projects”,  “Local   and
Community Projects”, “Material Recycling and Reuse Projects”. The reports used case
studies from London and other global cities to present recommendations and “lessons”
for the delivery of the Olympic legacy. Its signiﬁcance was twofold. Firstly, it introduced
community-oriented temporary  uses as a subset of “interim   uses” practices, and as
different from temporary commercial leases, such as for parking, storage or  private
events, which have become customary in large scale long-term development. Secondly,
it promoted the idea that interim  uses could act as “testing sites” and “be used to test
design agendas” (LLDC, 2013c, p. 7). As stated in the ﬁrst volume of the report:

    Interim uses are a key ingredient to evolving and applying long term strategies to speci ﬁc
    areas for a speci ﬁc purpose and group of people, and are therefore an opportunity for the
    LLDC to test and build its long-term aspirations through a meaningful interim phase.
    (emphasis added, London Legacy Development Corporations, 2013c,p.7)

In practice, the notion of  testing meant that some of the key elements in the Olympic
legacy agenda could be “experimented  with”  through  temporary  commissions and

8



projects: both in terms of new architectural and design approaches to physical redevelopment, 
and in terms of new approaches to “grass-roots” urban design and delivery of
socio-economic regeneration programs. This was particularly valued in relation to the
delivery of  community facilities  required in  the  planning permission for  the  Legacy
Community  Scheme and would be achieved by focusing on uses that promoted  the
regeneration objectives of “sports,  healthy living,   arts and  culture  and community
engagement” (Interview, 15 July 2014).
    To LLDC officers, the program offered a valuable opportunity for undertaking “different types of 
interim  use experiments”  and for   them to  “take  risks”  (Interview,
2 September 2014). The risk-taking dimension of interim uses was understood both in
terms of new design approaches and in relation to process-based collaborative design and
governance, in partnership with  local groups, organizations and urban professionals.
According to the Learning from Others report, one of the beneﬁts of interim uses is that
“projects can be easily created and collaboratively delivered by the community, young
professionals and the public and private sector, allowing a healthy mix of different people
involved in the place shaping of an area” (London Legacy Development Corporations,
2013c, p. 7). Partnerships between public and private sectors, community groups and
professionals were presented as a desirable “healthy mix” for  delivering  community
facilities. The loose usage of the language of risk and testing appears to apply a design
and architectural framework to the delivery of social beneﬁts and community engagement, 
with  problematic deterministic  undertones as the fringes that  needed stitches
become experimental site for social and architectural “tests”. The notion of testing points
in the  direction  of  what Lauermann has described as a shift  within  entrepreneurial
urbanism, characterized by the emergence of the mechanism of “policy experiments”
in  parallel to  conventional  growth  politics  and involving  “a  variety  of  metrics  for
evaluating entrepreneurial ‘success’ and ‘failure’ in terms other  than  local economic
growth” (Lauermann, 2018, p. 214). In what follows, I draw on the planning and delivery
of Hub67  to examine tensions emerging between the official  urban agenda, with its
speci ﬁc metrics, and the professionals and community groups that constituted the “grass-
roots” counterpart of the commission.


Vacant  land  and  setting   up a  temporary   community    hub

To residents, the idea of  setting up  a community  hub  originated in  2010 when the
organizers of the annual Hackney Wick Festival won the Big Local, a community award
funded by the  National  Lottery and  managed by Local Trust.  This was awarded to
community groups in  the UK  with  the aim  of supporting  residents “to make [their]
community a  better place to  live, changing things for  the  better” (Big  Local, 2014).
With  money from the  fund, the organizers set up the “Wick  Award”  and led  a local
consultation to  decide  how  to  spend it. 2
As  narrated  by  the former  chair  of  the Hackney Wick Festival and youth  worker, the results of  the consultation were clear:
a “community hub, particularly  for young people, was something that was coming up
again and again” at a time when the area was increasingly witnessing the opening of
“eateries, the cafes, those kind of places that the average Hackney Wick residents can’t
afford or don’t identify with” (Interview, 17 July 2014). Despite the Big Local funding,
ﬁ nding a local venue where a youth center could be established proved difficult: “that

9



all went very wrong. We didn’t really have a venue, we couldn’t ﬁnd anything”. For two
years, she arranged meetings with civil servants, local politicians and officers from local
councils to garner support for  the center. One day she was approached by an LLDC
officer at  a  local  community  event  and  told  about  their  decision  to  commission
a temporary  purpose-built  youth  center on  a vacant plot  of  land,  property  of  the
Corporation.
    Accounts of temporary and interim uses often present vacant spaces as spontaneous
“interstices” in cities, and limited scholarship has to date presented in-depth analysis of
the politics  of vacant production  (O’Callaghan et  al., 2018). To  avoid a tabula  rasa
approach to temporary uses, it is important to brieﬂy explain the history of the site on
which Hub67 was built.  The land, at  67 Rothbury Road, was one of seven plots and
buildings acquired by the London Thames Gateway Development Corporation(LTGDC)
in  summer 2010. The plot had been purchased from PricewaterhouseCoopers, who
became administrators to the property after the previous owner, land trading company
Rock Investments, ﬁled for bankruptcy in 2009 following the global ﬁnancial crisis. The
purchase was accompanied by a £3m investment by the LTGDCinto improving access to
and through Hackney Wick, through the redesign of alleyways, paths, pedestrian bridges,
new lighting and surveillance of public spaces, delivered in conjunction with the London
Development Agency and the Olympic Delivery Authority. Prior to the acquisition, the
land had been occupied by a warehouse that since 1999 had hosted the studios of Bangla
TV, later relocated to Pudding Mill Lane.
    The vacant plot was located a few hundred meters from the exit of the Hackney Wick
Overground station and  on the  pedestrian route along White  Post Lane toward the
popular Queen’s Yard and the White Building,  a temporary art studio and exhibition
space refurbished as part of the Stitching the Fringes program and owned by the LLDC.
As reported by The Estates Gazette in 2010, the LTGDC chief executive wanted Hackney
Wick to emerge “from underneath the shadow of the Olympic stadium to become the
next destination  for  creative industry  creation  and  growth  after the  2012 Games”
(emphasis added, quoted in Norman, 2010). The vacancy of the plot of land on which
Hub67 was built was thus the result of both the east-ward expansion of London’s urban
growth strategy, through the LTGDC, the Olympic bid and the establishment of a post-Games 
Mayoral Development Corporation, and of the effect of the ﬁnancial crisis on
speculative real estate investment. In 2011, an Outline planning application submitted to
the LTGDCproposed the construction of a mixed-use development of over one hundred
ﬂats, 6,000 sq. m. ofice space and 1,500 sq. m. retail, indicating a clear public-led policy
direction for  the  development of  the formerly  light-industrial   area and low-income
residential area.
    While  the application was undergoing planning scrutiny  before being granted, the
LLDC was approached by a series of private companies seeking to lease the vacant site
and establish temporary food and retail outlets, in the expectation of high footfall in the
area during the  London  2012 Games. 3
Officers  working  in  urban design proposed, instead, to “let it for  free and do a ‘meanwhile’ competition” (Interview, 15 July 2014).
As narrated by a member of the team:

    We thought, we have got these sites, wouldn’t it be great to do something that was more
    open to the community? That made the most of it and met our objectives and our priority

10
                                                                                                          


    themes? That  looked at  animating  routes, ultimately,  in   the longer-term,  into  Queen
    Elizabeth Olympic Park? [Something] that came and was grown from the local community?
    And  had maybe a different offer than some of the other projects that we’ve been doing, like
    the White  Building, which was more for the artistic community  and creatives? (Interview,
    2 September 2014)

In  the positive   narrative   of the  officers,  the  “meanwhile”    use would   be offering something  
distinctively different from   other  artistic   and “creative”   temporary uses that  the
Corporation   had  already  supported  in  Hackney  Wick.   Beyond  “animating”    routes into
the  QEOP,   and  meeting   the  “priority     themes”   of  the   Legacy,  the  program    was  to
involve   a  “local   community”     understood    as  distinct    from   other   local   artistic    and
creative  communities.    Such a  distinction    shows  the  establishment   of  temporary   uses
as a vernacular  of creative  cities  policies  (Mould,   2014), as well  as a clear separation,  in
LLDC’s   vision,  between   different inhabitants    and  uses of   the  neighborhood,    which,
nonetheless,  positions   both  on  the  same  plane,  regardless  of  social  inequalities.   Two
months  before  the  London   2012 Games a  call was  put  out  for  the  three-month   use of
one part  of the 67  Rothbury  Road  site, and was won  by Frontside   Gardens, a temporary
volunteer-run    skate  park   assembled  through   recycled   materials. 4
At   the  end   of  the following   year, a  call for   tender  was put  out  for  the  land  beside the  skate  park,  whose
lease had been extended.


Young  people   and  the  “two   communities”

Originally,   the hub  was to  be built  during   spring  and summer  2013, but  the  project  was
delayed by logistical  and legal  issues internal  to the LLDC   and it was only  in  late autumn
2013 that  a selection of  socially-engaged  architecture  and  design studios  were  invited  to
tender  for   a  temporary   community     hub  (LLDC,    2013b).  The   winning   architectural
project  was centered on  two  elements: a participatory   design  process that  would  involve
future   users and   on  a  sustainable  approach   through   the   re-use  and  repurposing    of
existing  materials  from   the Games,  mainly  the  metal  containers  and  fences. These two
components  motivated   what  the Hub67   architect  deﬁned  as “a pragmatic”   approach  to
the proposal:

    given where we are and given what we got, the whole premise being [that we] need to reuse
    and [given] the uncertainty of what we were really going to be [re]using [. . .] the detail and
    the niceness would be in the detail rather than in the actual form. I liked the idea that you
    ﬁnd some cabins and stack them up on top of each other and say this is a community center,
    [and]  now  we  are going  to make  it  nice. That  tends to  be  our  approach. (Interview,
    17 July 2014)

Given the community-led    consultation   exercise of 2011 and the identiﬁcation    of the need
for a community   youth  center,  the architects  at Hub67  expected to  be connected with   an
already-established  youth   group   ready  to  engage  in  the  design   and  decision-making
process. Their  original  plan  was to present a simple  design “and  then  get the community
in  to  make it   their  own”   (Interview,   17  July 2014),  using  participatory    architecture   to
encourage community   involvement    in the  project.
    The  initial   youth  group,   however,  was no  longer  active. The  long  delay  between the
consultation,   the offer   of the  site  in  2013 and  the  actual beginning   of  design  in  spring

11



2014 had  negatively   affected the  participation    and  interest   of  local  young  people  and
youth  workers.  During  this  time,  attempts  had been made  to set up  a mobile  youth  club
with  the aim of  building  a potential   user group to  be involved  in  the design. As explained
by the  former  chair  of  the Hackney  Wick   Festival, many  venues around   Hackney  Wick
had offered spaces, but their  uncertain  and ﬂexible  availability  over  time was disruptive   to
the process of  developing  a consistent  youth  group:

    [. . .] we needed to develop some consistency. We needed to have stuff happening at a time
    when they knew that it was happening. We couldn’t shift things from one week to the next
    because on an outreach basis we didn’t have that sort of  relationship with  them. So, we
    needed to be able to say to them, pitch up on a Tuesday night, wherever it is and will see you
    there. And that wasn’t possible because of the shifting nature of a lot of stuff that happened
    in  the Wick. (Interview, 17 July 2014)

The second issue affecting  participation   and interest  in  the design process had  to do with
the actual  building   location.  In  her  view, drawing   on  her experience  as a youth  worker,
the  “two   communities”    that  needed  to   be connected   were  not  the   old  and  the  new
neighborhoods   in  the   QEOP,  as was  the  objective   of  the  LLDC,   but   rather  the  two
socially, culturally   and  economically   different  communities   within   Hackney  Wick   itself.
Apparent   to  local  residents  at  the  time  was  the  separation  between  the  communities
living  in  council  housing,  such as the  Trowbridge   Estate and the  Eastway Park  Estate in
the northern   part  of  the  Wick  Ward,  and  the  “creative”   area, south  of the  railway  line,
where  most   cafes,  restaurants   and   nightlife    venues  were  located.   The   relationship
between the  residential   side and  the  creative  areas was, in  her  opinion,   “very   limited”
because of  the  unaffordable  prices  of  food   and  beverages and  because  young  people
tended  to  be “intimidated     by  these spaces”. It   was for  this   reason that   they  had plan
a youth  hub, which   was intended:

    for  people who haven’t made a lifestyle choice to live in Hackney Wick, but who have no
    choice but to live in Hackney Wick [. . .] This isn’t another trendy venue where you can get
    a ﬂat  white or  a ﬂapjack . . . it really is about  people who I think  have been left behind.
    (Interview,  17 July 2014)

The physical  and  cultural   distance between  the  two  areas, cut by  a railway  line,  was an
issue of concern  as Rothbury  Road site  offered by the LLDC was located  in  the southern
“creative”   side  of  Hackney   Wick.   In   2014, concerns   were  expressed  that  this   might
constitute  a  barrier  to  participation    as “it   might   be [too   far]  and  there  will   be people
who will   have problems  getting   there”  (Interview,   17 July  2014), as it  was “not   uncom-
mon”  for  teenagers to  have never crossed “the  Wick”   beyond  the  railway  station.



Externalizing    risk

Hub67  was a key  project  within   the LLDC’s   Grass-roots  Interim   Uses program.   To the
Corporation,   it  exempliﬁed  the two  main  values ascribed  to temporary   uses, as “testing”
new approaches  to urban  design  and to  working   with  local  communities:

    From  a  design perspective [. . .] more  ambitious,  creative, recycled, reused, up-cycled
    approaches. From a community perspective, it is about trialing and piloting  models, new
    approaches, new kinds of facilities, which is exactly what Hub67 is aiming to do. And it’s

12



    always about doing that in a temporary, kind of light-touch way, where we can take a few
    more risks and we can try things out. (Interview, 2 September 2014)

In the experience of the Hub67 architects, however, the risks of repurposing and reusing
existing materials fell mostly on them, due to the discrepancy between the unpredictability of 
innovative designs and institutional demands of the LLDC. To begin with, the
decision to extend the temporal length of the project to over two years meant that the
construction had to be subjected to building regulations and the formerly temporary and
makeshift structure had to be anchored by deep cement foundations (Ferreri & Lang,
2016). Secondly, although the containers had been assembled for short-term summer use,
the LLDC required the building  to have full certiﬁcation  for thermal efficiency, so the
architects had to rethink their approach to repurposing. The tendering requirements of
the LLDC, moreover, meant that the building speci ﬁcations agreement shifted the risk of
experimenting with recycled materials from the organization to the suppliers, in this case
the architectural studio. As explained by the architect of Hub67 “it’s all about liability,
[about] who will take on the risk of reused stuff” (Interview, 17 July 2014). At the same
time, the experimental character of the project made it valuable to the studio, despite
their expectations of making a loss, or at most to break even with costs. As explained by
one of the architects:

    to prove that the LLDC can produce something with recycled materials, there should be real
    life building contracts in order to make this happen, and so I hope at the end we could sit
    down and say, ok, we’ve learnt this and this and this, and we are not going to do again like
    this, or we will, and that it does become constructive. (Interview, 17 July 2014)

For the  architects, the value of the  project thus  resided in the  chance of testing an
approach with and for the LLDCthrough yet untested design processes revolving around
the sustainable reuse of existing materials. The delivery of the building would become
tangible evidence of how it was possible “to change the way we build buildings” with the
possibility that the lesson could inform  future  LLDC commissions and building  con-
tracts. The building was ﬁnally completed in November 2014 and opened to the public in
the middle of December 2014.
    Beyond the construction, the governance and funding structure set up a model that too
involved a degree of risk for community groups involved in the project, as common in
urban entrepreneurial models. The LLDC had provided the plot  of land, managed its
commission and funded the construction of the building. During its ﬁrst year, it was also
involved in its management, setting Key Performance Indicators such as “opening hours
every week, number of visitors through the doors, number of community groups supported 
by use of the space” (Interview, 2 September 2014). Setting indicators clearly shows
that despite the rhetoric of a “grassroots” space, the management framework of the Hub
was substantially top-down, and followed corporate standards of performance assessment.
This was matched by a mixed funding approach, through which theWickAward was asked
to contribute part of the salary of the only full-time paid staff. Moreover, in the management 
and funding structure there was an expectation that Hub67 would achieve ﬁnancial sustainability by its second year, 
and the possibility that alternative income would need to be sought through commercial hire of the venue
had already been written into early drafts ofHub67Management Plan in 2014, 
framing a strongpush for anentrepreneurial and self-funded approach to the delivery of the activities in the medium term, which members of

13



Hub67 steering group5 saw as highly  unrealistic (Interview, 10  November 2014). In
May 2016, as the center’s lease continued to be extended, the LLDC ﬁnally gave the
management to The Yard Theater, an independent pop-up  venue and theater group
based in nearby, “creative”,Queens’ Yard.



“Seeding”   long-term    uses

Besides offering the opportunity for new architectural design and community-oriented
approaches, the Hub67 was presented by the LLDC  as a “prototype”  for  delivering
longer-term regeneration beneﬁts. The LLDC had justi ﬁed building a temporary rather
than a permanent community youth facility in Hackney Wick as a question of building
a social infrastructure before the actual building: “what we don’t want to do is to build
a community place, a youth club, a community hall, [which] then just sits empty because
there isn’t anyone who identiﬁes with it, or knows it’s there, or feels any ownership of it”
(Interview, 15 July 2014). The future of  these temporary community-oriented experiments, however, 
was beginning to be publicly questioned, for instance in the context of
public examinations of the  local development plan (see LLDC, 2013a). As an officer
commented: “people are realizing that interim uses are all very well, but it is disappointing when they ﬁnish”, 
so the LLDC  was keen to experiment with “using these sites as
opportunities for seeding long-term uses” (Interview, 15 July 2014).
    Rather than “seeding long-termuses” in the areaswhere theprojectswere set, the officers
imagined the seeding as part of the design of newneighborhoods on the QEOP site, where
facilities would be moved to after an “incubation” period in Hackney Wick. When asked for
details, the “seeding” was explained through another metaphor: that of a “stepping stone”
toward the new developments in the Park: “[Hub67] is meant to be a place or a facility that
people feel ownership of and then could hopefully transfer,likeapop-up.Wecan ’tcarry
lock stock and barrel into the park, but at least, whoever is running it, and the user groups,
can transfer in” (emphasis added, Interview, 15 July 2014). Stepping on the interim uses,
user groups and the hub managers were imagined hopping over the canal to the newly
developed neighborhoods. The stepping stone metaphors could not offer a clearer vision
for the logic of pop-up networked and mobile connectivity, which the local users would
“hopefully” able to comply with.
    The idea that the social infrastructure of Hub67 could “transfer” so easily was met with
skepticism and described by people involved in its steering group as “really unrealistic”.
As evidenced by the experience of trying to set up a pop-up youth club, young people
found themselves marginalized by the local geographies of the “creative industries” and
by their relative spatial isolation in the northern part  of the Hackney Wick Ward, and
would be unlikely to be able to move their activities elsewhere. The transferring scenario
showed a potential lack of understanding of the human investment and commitment
required to build a youth community facility “it’s not as simple as just picking something
up and  moving  it  somewhere else” (Interview, 17  July 2014). The  idea of  moving
a community club away from its neighborhood raised questions about the involvement
of local  residents, community groups  and potential  other welfare and  public  sector
officers, in contrast to the temporally limited investment of a development company:

14


    From a political point  of view, with a small p, I think it can be quite challenging for people
    like the Hackney youth services and the [local] councilors . . . not for the Legacy Company
    because I genuinely don’t think that they need to have that on-going investment in it. You
    know, they do their bit,  it’s a pop-up and they go away again. (Interview, 17 July 2014)

In  addition   to  being  a  challenge  for  formal   infrastructures    of  public   and  community
support,  the “pop-up”    imaginary  of  an interim   use project  can foreclose  involvement   as
“it  can be a bit of  a get out. If  something  is not  permanent,  it  could mean  it’s not  needed.
It’s  not  relevant”.   A  stark   juxtaposition    is  made  between  the  rootedness  of  Hackney
Wick’s  long-term   residents and  local  authorities,  and  a “pop-up”   development   corpora-
tion,  whose investment   in  local  regeneration   was to  be time-limited.    In  relation   to  the
speciﬁc needs of young people in  low-income   areas, “making  a temporary  provision   [. . .]
is actually quite  irresponsible”.   The temporary   nature of  the social benefits was remarked
upon  by local  campaign  groups, such  as Save Hackney Wick,  which   challenged the  idea
that  Games’ legacy  was “improving    historically    deprived  areas”.  They  pointed   out  the
lack of  replacement,  in  the local  plans,  for the  functions   of Hub67   once the  lease of the
land ended (Save Hackney  Wick,  2018). The difficulties   in promoting    the participation   of
young  people in   the programming    at Hub67   could  also  be ascribed  to ﬁssure  between
“on-demand”    and “pop-up”    approaches  and  the  temporalities   of  creating  a consistent
group. As  concluded  by the authors  of  the Wick  Award  Big  Local report  in  2016, despite
the center  being  in  operation  for   over a  year, “none  of  the  young  people [interviewed]
mentioned  Hub   67” (p.  34);  the authors  recommended   a speci ﬁc outreach  program   on
the Trowbridge   Estate and  in  the surrounding   area.
    The  lease of  the management   to the  Yard  Theater  led  to  the creation   of  The Yard’s
Young  Artists  Program,   which  enabled  to  a more  sustained  approach  to  young  people
and youth-oriented   activities.   At this  moment   in time,  the program   involves  75 children
and young  people from  the ages of 4–19. As  was observed by youth  workers  in  the initial
phase of  the hub,  participation    of  local  teenagers was difficult   to  generate  and  sustain.
Awareness  of  barriers   to  participation,     as well   as of  the   distance  between  the   “two
communities”    led   to   a  strategic   approach,   as  explained    by   a  Yard   Theater   local
coordinator:

    Because there has historically been a lack of provision for young people in this area, it is
    a long-term project to bring people from the local area in. So, we have played a long game. In
    our primary years, from 4 to 11, we work in partnerships with the local primary schools [. . .]
    and we offer the activities through the schools’ clubs provisions, so every week our artists go
    out and collect children from the schools and bring them to the hub. The idea being that we
    build  connection with these young people [. . .] so that in 5-year time, we will have local 15-
    year-olds involved too,  because they have gone through the process with us. (Interview,
    18 February 2019)

Despite the  longer-term   strategic  planning,   the future   of the  youth  activities   and of  the
center  remains  highly   precarious,  as  the  management  lease for   Hub67  has  only  been
renewed until  the end  of 2019. The original   plan to  relocate the center  across the canal by
2017 was delayed. In 2019, it  appears that the relocation   might  not  take place because the
site of  the new  neighborhood,   Sweet  Waters,  is currently   being  redesigned  as Clarnico
Quay,  a temporary   “creative”   site  to  be managed  by  a temporary   use  company  called
Makeshift,  in  a further   extension  of the  temporary  urban  paradigm.   The possibility   that
youth-oriented    activities   may   continue   at  The   Yard  Theater   main   site  is  also  very

15


uncertain, as the planned demolition  and redevelopment of Queen’s Yard will  likely
result in the  relocation of the theater (Interview,  18 February 2019). The shift in  the
management of the center demonstrated the alignment between the imaginary of a pop-up community 
infrastructure  and cultural  practices of  temporary uses built  around
flexible and short-term planning. But the desire to develop a long-term program respon-
sive to the needs of local young people reveals the limits of a precarious infrastructure
based around on-demand connectivity. Without a promise to relocate the Hub67, and
with the main theater site under threat of residential development, the vision of seeding
long-term uses in the neighborhood appears at best uncertain.


Learning  “on-demand    communities”

“Grassroots” temporary uses in the neighborhoods surrounding the  Queen Elizabeth
Olympic Park were commissioned as sites for experimenting with new forms of produ-
cing urban spaces, both architecturally and in terms of community engagement. As the
case of Hub67 has shown, translating  the rhetoric  of  experimentation into  practice
created tensions not just  in  terms of  complex contractual negotiations (Raco, 2012;
2014) but  also, importantly,  in   terms of  the  needs and  temporalities of  its  direct
bene ﬁciary in the local resident community. The self-organized approach to identifying
limited resources for social programs and fundraising for it at the national level, initiated
and undertaken by volunteers in the spirit of the “powerful spatial imaginary” of austerity
localism (Featherstone et al., 2012), met the insurmountable hurdle of a lack of institutional  
support  to  develop continuity   of  use.  Under  these conditions,  establishing
a relationship with the LLDC as one of the main landowners in the neighborhood was
a necessary tactic for gaining access to space. According to the metrics of experimental
entrepreneurship, the case of Hub67 could be interpreted as a successful one: proactive
civil society organizations deployed entrepreneurial and flexible tactics to gain community facilities, 
generating new governance and management models for the delivery of
a social program. This was largely due to the involvement of  the Yard Theater, itself
a successful example of a pop-up and self-funded cultural venue. The governance model
set up by the LLDC through its interim  use commission, however, ultimately revolved
around the externalization of part of the funding and management risks to community
and artistic organizations, making it a highly precarious arrangement.
    Beyond the immediate concerns of the architectural design, and the question of young
people’s participation, the LLDC also externalized the political responsibility for the longer-term needs 
and expectations of its users. To those involved in Hub67, the longer-term
horizon continues to be dominated by the likely replacement of social and community
activities by more proﬁtable residential uses, making visible a fundamental chasm between
the rhetoric of community-led temporary use and the experimental and pro-growth urban
agenda of the  LLDC. The  proposed regeneration benefits of the youth  center were
fundamentally conditional on the  acceptance of its future uprooting and  its intended
temporary beneﬁciaries as not worthy of long-term investment, unless they themselves
became mobile and transferrable. The idea of negotiating social benefits through interim
uses reproduces imaginaries of “drag and drop” temporary and pop-up urbanism (Harris,
2015) predicated on a normative fantasy of spatial mobility and ﬂexibility that excludes
large sections of  the  urban  population,  let  alone  young  people from   low-income

16



backgrounds. In   relation  to  their  needs, Hub67  presents a case of  welfare conditionality,
where provision   of  a  public  service  becomes dependent  upon  compliance   with  speciﬁc
patterns of  behavior: acceptance of “on  demand”  social connectivity   and resignation  to  its
eventual transfer  elsewhere. Unsurprisingly,   the favored  vehicles for  the construction   and
management of  the  community   center  were projects  belonging  to  creative cities’  tactical
urbanism,  such as self-organized pop-up  theaters and  temporary  architectural  projects.  In
a further   extension  of  interim   uses’ “creative”   vernacular  (Mould,    2014), excluded  low-income 
communities  are asked to learn from  precarious  creative practitioners  and be ready
to be  summoned  when  and  where  needed, accepting  that  (social) collaborations   will  be
preemptively  short-term.   The  institutional   incorporation    of  community-oriented    “grass-roots”  
temporary   uses  could  thus   play  a  highly   problematic   role  in   ushering  in   and
normalizing  new  precarious ways for  local  communities  to  gain social benefits at times of
austerity.


Conclusions

Community-oriented    temporary   uses are emerging as a subset of interim  use practices  in
vacant  spaces, alongside  but   distinct   from   creative  and  commercial   practices.   In  the
context  of  urban  austerity,  they  become vehicles  for  delivering   social  benefits, normalizing  
exclusionary   logics of  “on-demand    connectivity”    and temporal   foreclosure.   Such
a normalization    becomes  particularly   problematic    in  the  case of  community-oriented
interim   uses, commissioned  by  a public   development   body  under  an “urban   regeneration”   agenda,  
in  an  area  already  marked   by  the  production    of  negative  imaginaries,
displacement   and   exclusion    (Davis,   2014;   Davis   &   Thornley,    2010;  Watt,    2013).
Beyond  the speciﬁcities   of Hackney   Wick  and  of  post-Olympic    development,  it  points
to the  possibility  of  a wider  deployment   of community-oriented     temporary   and  interim
uses as a useful planning tool to  “lubricate  structural   changes and its associated risks” and
normalize  “an  attitude  that  takes inequality   for  granted”  (Madanipour,    2018, p. 1106).
    To  conclude,  three signiﬁcant  issues emerge for  critical  urban  geographies of  community-oriented   
temporary  use policies and practices  at times of  austerity. The  ﬁrst concerns
the  vision   of   temporary   and  interim    projects   as  “testing   grounds”   for   regeneration
agendas. The  language of  “tests”   and  “prototypes”   reveals  an  underlying   experimental
entrepreneurial   approach  to  local  planning   and  community    participation,   which   often
relies on devaluing  existing  residents and  users and disregarding  their  longer-term   needs.
Underneath  the language of  experimentation   lies a fundamental  retreat  from  any attempt
at long-term  investment  into  areas of high deprivation,   while  temporary  places for welfare
provision,   such   as  container   and   pop-up   housing,   are   on  the   rise   (Harris,   2015).
The  second  issue concerns  the  idea  of  temporary   community    projects  functioning    as
“stepping  stones” for  potential   other  places and users. In  this  problematic   notion,   ideals
of  transferrable  social  infrastructures    become  normative   in  pro-growth    strategies  that
openly disregard  multiple  forms  of social disadvantage and  the complexities  of developing
community-led   spaces and provision.  In  the  case of “people who  haven’t  made a lifestyle
choice to live  in  Hackney  Wick”,  the  only  proposed option   for negotiating   social beneﬁts
from  the  post-Olympic    redevelopment  is  through   (borrowing   Emma  Jackson’s phrase)
“ﬁxity  inmobility”     (Jackson, 2012). The notion  of pop-up  transferability  shows a profound
disconnect between the application   of temporary  use discourses in planning  and  the social

17



dynamics that  make possiblemeaningful   community   engagement over time.  Finally, while
the idea  of an  improvisational   city  raises the hope  of  more  incremental,  sustainable  and
community-led    urban   policymaking,   its   inclusion   in  an   experimental   entrepreneurial
urban  agenda  appears to  be  introducing    new  models  of  exclusionary   governance  and
more  uncertain   public  service  delivery.   Temporary   community   spaces such  as Hub67
become the  visible,  architectural  embodiment   of  broader  anticipatory   politics   of service
withdrawal  in  austerity  UK,  particularly   affecting  young  people (Horton,   2016). As  community-oriented
temporary   uses  become  more   established, residents   and  community
groupsmay  ﬁnd  themselves increasingly entangled  in precarious, entrepreneurial   and “on-demand”  
engagement with  public  institutions   while  at  the same time  facing  the impossibility  
of laying claim  to  social services and places in  the long-term.










