1





Operation of signalized diamond interchanges with frontage roads using dynamic reversible lane control






                                     abstract


Signalized diamond interchanges (SDI), connecting major highways and surface streets in urban and suburban areas, 
are probably the most widely used interchange patterns. The limited storage space between the two closely joined intersections coupled with heavy
traffic  volumes may easily oversaturate the facility and cause spillback problems, 
especially with  the presence of frontage roads. This paper presents an innovative design and
operational model for SDI by dynamically reversing certain lanes in the  internal link on
a regular basis with the deployment of  overhead reversible lane control signs. A Binary-Mixed-Integer-Linear-Program (BMILP) 
is formulated  to  simultaneously  optimize  lane markings, dynamic usage of the reversible lane, and signal timings for the new SDI system.
Results from extensive numerical analyses reveal the promising property of the proposed design and operational model in expanding capacity 
and reducing congestion at the SDI with  frontage roads.
                                                                                                                                                    


Keywords:
Signalized diamond interchange
Capacity
Reversible lane 
Binary-Mixed-Integer-Linear-Program


1. Introduction


     Diamond  interchanges  are the probably  the  most commonly   used interchange  patterns  in  urban and suburban  areas, connecting 
major  highways  and surface  streets with  two  closely  spaced intersections.  When  traffic  demand is high,  intersections
need to be signalized  and  may become  the bottleneck   due to the  limited   spacing between  them.  Therefore,  signalized  intersections 
are  often  the key  operational   elements  within   the  interchange  system  (Fang and  Elefteriadou,  2006).
     Spacing between  intersections   at  a diamond  interchange   typically   ranges from  less than  120m   to  240m   or more  (TRB,
2000). Such proximity    creates  a number  of  interactive   effects  that  complicate   the operation   (Xu  et al., 2010).  It  limits   the
storage capacity  available   for  queued turning   vehicles  and  may  induce  spillback   problems  on  the  internal  link.   Blockages
and delays  due to  queue  spillback  can  then  prevent  vehicles  at  the  upstream  intersection   from   reaching  the downstream
stop line, resulting   in inefﬁcient   utilization    of green times.  During  traffic  demand  peak periods, such  interactions  may  ﬁnally
cause traffic  gridlock   at  adjacent  intersections.   To  address these  challenges,  it  is essential   to develop   more  efﬁcient   lane
utilization   and  signal control   strategies  to  operate the  two  closely  space signalized  intersections.
     In  review   of  literature,   this   unique   operational   problem   at  diamond   interchanges   was  conventionally    addressed  by
optimizing   signal  control  plans  (Messer  and Chang,  1987;  Chaudhary  and Chu,  2000;  Tian, 2004),  falling  into   two  general




2


categories: namely the three-phase control (Munjal, 1971; Messer et al., 1977) and the four-phase control (Engelbrecht et al.,
2001; Engelbrecht and Barnes, 2003; Gordon and Tighe, 2005; Pham et al., 2011). As shown in Fig. 1, the three-phase control
treats the diamond interchange as two separate intersections, each having three phases. One phase is for through movements 
on the surface street, the second for through and left movements from the internal links and the third for ramp movements. 
Three-phase operation is efﬁcient if turning traffic volumes are light, and can minimize the cycle length. However, as
turning volumes increase, this plan can lead to internal queue spillback and operational breakdown (Gordon and Tighe,
2005). The four-phase control could avoid most queuing problems by giving each of the four approaches from which inter-
change traffic originates a clear phase through both intersections. However, because it requires four phases, longer cycle
lengths are needed which may reduce the capacity of the intersection (Fang, 2004). Moreover, it generally decreases the
effective green time per cycle ratio for major movements, resulting higher expected delays than a three-phase control plan
(TRB, 2000; Nelson et al., 2000).
    When a diamond interchange is oversaturated with high left-turn demand, the conventional treatment of providing left-turn 
bays with  protected left-turn phases may not be sufﬁcient to avoid long delays. Researchers have been looking for
unconventional interchange designs to squeeze more capacity out of a diamond interchange with oversaturated traffic conditions. 
As one of the most popular unconventional interchange designs, Diverging Diamond Interchange (DDI) has received
increasing attention in recent years due to its cost-effectiveness over a traditional diamond interchange design. The key logic
of DDI is to provide efﬁcient navigation for both left-turn and through movements between highway ramps, and to accommodate 
left-turning movements onto the arterial without using a left-turn bay (Yang et al., 2013). As shown in Fig. 2, the
reverse operations of the through traffic between two ramp terminals in a DDI design allow its left-turn traffic ﬂows from
the freeway off-ramps to the opposing ﬂows at each sub-intersection (Edara et al., 2005). With such an assignment of ﬂow
movements, a DDI design can signiﬁcantly reduce the number of traffic conﬂict points. And there is a great potential of the
DDI to yield a better performance over the conventional SDI in increasing capacity and reducing delay primarily due to its
efﬁcient two-phase signal operation (Chlewicki, 2003; Bared et al., 2005; Smith and Speth, 2008; Bared, 2009; Maji et al.,
2013). However, the DDI concept also has some disadvantages, such as: (a) most of these analyses are based on the assumption 
that the freeway frontage roads do not exist, or there is no need to facilitate vehicular travel between the freeway off-ramp and on-ramp, 
for a signalized diamond interchanges with frontage roads (SDI-FR), a third phase should be added to
accommodate the through movements on the frontage roads (Martinez and Cheu, 2012), hence the advantages of DDI are
undermined; (b) it requires additional construction and permanent changes in layout, which cannot be turned on and off
as needed; and (c) the reverse operations of the through traffic in the internal link in a DDI design may cause serious driving
errors, especially the wrong-way violations, which may result in an increase in crashes.
    One assumption underlying the above operational models is that the geometric layout, including the number of lanes on
different directions in the internal link  as well as lane markings at intersection approach lanes, is given as an exogenous
input and will not change throughout the operation process. However, when an intersection is oversaturated with high traffic demand, 
the conventional signal control models may not be sufﬁcient to avoid long delays at the signalized diamond
interchanges. Furthermore, due to spatial and environmental limitations, it is becoming increasingly difﬁcult to improve diamond 
interchange operations through geometric improvements.
    A further examination of current SDI operation reveals that the large and unbalanced left-turning traffic volume coupled
with  limited spacing and turning lanes on the  internal link  contributes most to  its failure. Realizing this problem, this
research develops a new way to signiﬁcantly improve the operation of the SDI using dynamic reversible lanes (DRL) in
the internal link. The basic concept is to set all the left-turn lanes in the internal link as reversible by using overhead reversible 
lane control signs. These lanes have the ﬂexibility to be used by different directions during different periods of a signal
cycle depending on left-turn volumes and patterns. Such a design would enable a dynamic and integrated utilization of the
internal link space and signal green times, resulting a substantial increase of the internal link capacity without the need of
major construction.





                                                                                          Overlap
                                       Phase 1                                                                                     Phase 2
                                                                                           Phase 1



                                                                                                                                         Overlap
                                       Phase 2                                       Phase 3
                                                                                                                                         Phase 4




                                       Phase 3                                       Phase 5                                 Phase 6
                     (a) Common three-phase plan (CTP)    (b) Texas Transportation Institute four-phase plan (TTI)

                                             Fig. 1. Common signalization schemes for diamond interchanges (TRB, 2000).

3









                                                         Fig. 2. Geometric layout of DDI design (Yang et al., 2013).



    The idea of the reversible lane operation has been well accepted by practitioners in manyother applications. The principle
is to conﬁgure the lanes of a roadway to match available capacity with varying traffic demand. One of the earliest applications 
of reversible roadways was in Los Angeles in 1928, with a convertible lane variant known as off-center lane movement
(Dorsey, 1948). Over the past decades, many different forms of reversible roadways have been used throughout the world to
address a variety of needs (Wolshon and Lambert, 2004), including accommodating traffic demand associated with frequent
and predictable unbalanced peak-period travel times (Upchurch, 1975; Agent and Clark, 1980; Karoonsoontawong and Lin,
2011; Nava et al., 2012), special event management (Gillis, 1990; Lambert and Wolshon, 2002; Wojtowicz and Wallace,
2010; Hua et al., 2013), and emergency evacuation (Wolshon, 2001; Theodoulou and Wolshon, 2004; Xie and Turnquist,
2011; Ren et al., 2012).
    Different from previous studies and applications, this study proposes to operate reversible lanes at the internal link of a
signalized diamond interchanges with frontage roads (SDI-FR) on a dynamic and regular basis. A mathematical model is further 
formulated to simultaneously optimize the lane markings, the dynamic usage of reversible lanes, and the signal timing
plans to achieve the best operational performance of the SDI.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the basic concept of signalized diamond interchanges with
dynamic reversible lanes (DRL) are illustrated. The integrated optimization model based on the DRL concept is formulated
in Section 3. Evaluation of the proposed model performance is conducted in Section 4 through extensive numerical and simulation analyses. 
Conclusions and recommendations are given at the end of the paper.


2. The DRL control concept

    The basic concept and operation of dynamic reversible lanes (DRL) at the signalized diamond interchange is illustrated in
Fig. 3. All the left-turn lanes in the internal link are set as reversible, and can be used by left-turn traffic from different directions 
during different periods in a signal cycle. Such design will increase the effective number of lanes used by left-turn traffic 
thereby allocating more green time for other traffic movements and increasing the overall SDI capacity accordingly.
    Fig. 4 further details the operational cycle of the proposed DRL system under the typical TTI four-phase control plan for
SDI. The dynamic reversible lanes are reserved as the left-turn lanes for the eastbound direction during the green phase of
arm 2 through and arm 5 left  turn, while used as the left-turn  lanes for westbound direction during the green phase of
arm 6 through and arm  1 left  turn. An animation of  the proposed DRL system operating at a SDI can be found at url:
‘‘https://www.dropbox.com/s/tlha4p4dedl19nt/SDI%20WITH%20DRL.mp4’’. Note that the reversible lanes can only serve
one movement direction in a signal phase, so the three-phase control plan is not compatible with the DRL. Furthermore,
the overlapping design in the TTI four-phase scheme is good for the queue storage and clearance in the reversible lanes
and can further improve the operational efﬁciency and safety of the proposed DRL system compared with the traditional
four-phase scheme without overlaps.


3. The optimization model  for DRL operation

    To maximize the operational efﬁciency of the proposed DRL system at the signalized diamond interchange, an optimiza-
tion model combining the design of the lane markings, dynamic reversible lane usage, and signal timings is developed in this
section.

4








                                             Fig. 3. Signalized diamond interchanges with dynamic reversible lanes (DRL).


3.1. Notations

    To facilitate model presentation, notations used hereafter are summarized in Table 1.

3.2. Objective function

    The proposed DRLsystem aims to maximize the reserved capacity at the SDI. By adopting the commonly used assumption
that the proportions of the traffic demand remain constant, maximizing the reserve capacity is equivalent to maximizing the
common ﬂow multiplier (Gallivan and Heydecker, 1988; Wong and Wong, 2003; Wong and Heydecker, 2011; Zhao et al.,
2013), l, given by:

       

3.3. Constraints

    The optimization problem shall include the ﬂow conservation constraints,
               
                                                                                                                                 
                 


       
the right-of-way constraints,


the lane assignment constraints,
                                                                                                                      

5




                                                                                           Fig.  4.   Operation   of  dynamic   reversible    lanes  at  SDI.


                          

6                                                         201


Table 1
Notation of key model parameters and variables.

    Sets and parameters
                                                         Set of arms at the SDI
                                              Index of arms
                                               Set of demand origins and destinations at the SDI
                                               An OD pair between origin o and destination 
                                               Set of turning movements on arm 
                                             Index of turning  movements on arm   for left-turn,  w=2  for  through movement, and  for right-turn
                                          Index of lanes, numbering from the left  most lane
                                    A binary indicator  showing if the OD pair (o, d) makes turning w on arm i (1 – Yes, 0 – No)
     
                                                          Length of the internal link 
                                                         Number of lanes on the internal link
                                                      Number of reversible lanes used as approach lanes on arm i
                                                  Number of lanes on the exit that receives turning w on arm i
                                                   Flow of movement w on arm i using lane k (vph)
                                                    Flow of movement w on arm i (vph)
                                                    Flow from demand origin  o to destination d (vph)
                                                        Flow ratio of lane k on arm i
                                                        Saturation ﬂow rate of lane k on arm i (vph)
                                                         Average speed on the internal link (m/s)
                                                   Minimum  speed on the internal link  (m/s)
                                                      Average space headway for queuing vehicles on the internal link (m)
                                                Maximum  acceptable degree of the saturation
                                                       Main-signal  cycle length (s)
                                        Minimum  and maximum  cycle length (s)
                                                  Minimum  duration  of green for movement w on arm i (s)
      
                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                               Clearance time for a pair of conﬂicting traffic  movements (s), weTi, w  e Tj

    Decision variables
                                                        Number of reversible lanes on the internal link
                                                        Number of ﬁxed approach lanes on arm i
                                                    A binary variable indicating  the permission of movement w on lane k on arm i
                                                        Reciprocal of main-signal cycle length (1/s)
                                                      Start of green for movement w on arm i
                                                    Starts of green on lane k on arm i
                                                      Green time ratio for movement w on arm  i
                                                       Green time ratio for  lane k on arm i
                                                      Green time ratio for  the overlap phase at the right-side intersection, as shown in Fig. 2




                                                                                                                                                                                                            ð24Þ

                                                                                                             ð34Þ
                           v

the acceptable level-of-service constraints,


the internal link reversible lane constraints,


the internal link overﬂow avoidance constraints,
                 
                     
and non-negative constraints for all decision variables listed in Table 1.
    Constraint (2) obtains the turning ﬂows given the set of demand origins and destinations as an exogenous input; Con-
straint (3) indicates that the sum of sub-ﬂows of a movement on different lanes should be equal to the total ﬂow of that

8

movement. Constraint (4) sets the assigned lane ﬂow  to 0 if the movement w on lane k at arm i  is not permitted
(i.e.,), where M presents an arbitrary large positive constant number.
    Constraint (5) limits the minimum number of permitted movements on traffic lanes, which allows each lane to carry at
least one movement; Constraint (6) sets the total number of lanes in the internal link, which is equal to the sum of the number 
of ﬁxed approach lane on arms 1 and 5, and the number of reversible lanes in the internal link; Constraints (7), (8) gives
the number of reversible lanes on each arm. Note that reversible lanes on arms 1 and 5 can be used as left-turn lanes, while
other arms have no reversible lanes; Constraints (9)–(11) restrict that only left turns are permitted to use reversible lanes in
the internal link, otherwise, it is hard to control the vehicles in the reversible lanes and not good for safety; Constraint (12)
sets that the number of lanes at a movement’s corresponding exit arm shall be at least as many as the total number of lanes
assigned to permit such a movement to prevent the bottleneck and undesirable traffic merging activities; Constraint (13)
prevents internal conﬂicts among lanes at an arm: for any two adjacent traffic lanes,  (left-hand) and  (right-hand)
lanes from arm i, if the traffic movement of turn  w is permitted on lane k + 1, then traffic movements of all other turns,
,   3, should be prohibited on lane k to eliminate potential internal-cross conﬂicts within an arm.
    Constraint (14) limits  the common cycle length for the  two sub-intersections at the SDI to be within  Cmin and Cmax.
According to (Wong and Wong, 2003;Wongand Heydecker, 2011), instead of deﬁning the cycle length directly as the control
variable, its reciprocal n=1/C, is used to preserve the linearity in the mathematical formulation; Constraint (15) conﬁnes the
starts of the green to be within a fraction between 0 and 1 of the cycle length; Constraint (16) indicates that the green time
ratio of a movement is subject to theminimumduration of green; Constraints (17), (18) deﬁnes the lane signal timings. More
speciﬁcally, if a lane is shared by more than one movement, these movements must receive identical signal indication to
avoid ambiguity. According to the TTI’s four-phase signalization scheme for diamond interchange, the left intersection at
the SDI should be subject to Constraints (19)–(25) for its signal operation; while Constraints (26)–(32) deﬁnes the phase
structure for the right intersection of the SDI according to TTI’s scheme. Constraints (33), (34) determine the length of the
overlap phase at both intersections at the SDI.
    Constraint (35) sets the ﬂow ratios on a pair of adjacent approach lanes to be identical if they share a common lane marking; 
cik is  the ﬂow  ratio  of lane k  on arm  i which  can be calculated with       
                                                                                                                                                                       if      ir
Constraint (36) limits the degree of saturation for each approach to be nomore than themaximum limit to ensure acceptable
level of service.
    Since the reversible lanes in the internal link could only serve one direction in a signal phase, for safety clearance purpose,
all the left-turn vehicles entering the reversible lanes shall be discharged during the corresponding downstream signal’s left-turn phase. 
Constraint (37) ensures that the corresponding left-turn capacity at the downstream intersection should be
greater than the volume entering the reversible lanes u is a safety marginal factor greater than 1.0 to prevent overﬂow
and improve safety and reliability of the reversible lane operations. Constraints (38), (39) are set to ensure safe clearance
of vehicles in the reversible lanes in the internal link.
    During the DRL operation, overﬂow in internal link shall be prevented. Therefore, the back-of-queue for movements (1,1),
(1,2), (5,1), and (5,2) should always be shorter than the length of the internal link, given by Constraints (40)–(43), respectively. 
The back-of-queue can be calculated with (TRB, 2000).

3.4. Solution

    The above optimization model for DRL operation is a Binary-Mixed-Integer-Linear-Program (BMILP) and can be solved by
the standard branch-and-bound routine to global optimal considering the limited number of variables for just two intersections at an SDI.


4. Numerical examples

    In this section, the performance of the SDI with DRL control is evaluated through numerical tests. The optimization results
obtained from the proposed model will be ﬁrst compared with conventional plans, including the TTI’s four-phase operation
(TTI) and the common three-phase operation (CTP) under different traffic demand levels. The impact of various SDI geometric conﬁgurations
and traffic patterns on the DRL operation is also investigated through sensitivity analysis.

4.1. Performance evaluation

    Asignalized diamond interchange with three approach lanes and three exit lanes on each armand six lanes in the internal
link is used as an example to evaluate the performance of the proposed DRL control model. Length of the internal link is
100 m. dsmax is set to be 0.9, Cmin and Cmax are set to be 60 s and 120 s, d  is set as 7m, sik is set to 1800 vphpl for all lanes,
u is set to be 1.1, v is set to 12.5 m/s, vmin is set to 10 m/s, and clearance time for any pair of conﬂicting traffic movements is
set to be 4 s. Three traffic demand levels (low, medium, and high) are designed for the test, as summarized in Table 2.
    The control plans and performance of the DRL are compared with TTI and CTP under all demand levels. To make a fair
comparison between the proposed DRL and other control plans, we have applied the developed model to optimizing lane
markings for TTI and CTP, and use TRANSYT-7F to optimize their signal timings. Since there is no existing integrated design

9



Table 2
Traffic demand levels.




for TTI  and CTP, the  conventional   enumeration   method   is used  to produce   the  optimal  design  results,  whereby   an initial
layout  is determined   and  then  the signal  timing   is calculated.  Although   it  is not  a perfect  method,  enumeration   method   is
applied   to  ensure  that   every   possible  lane   markings   for   TTI  and  CTP are  tried,   and   for  each  lane   marking   scheme,
TRANSYT-7F is used to  optimize   their   signal  timings.  Therefore,  it  is  ensured  that  the  optimal   design  results  for  TTI  and
CTP could be produced for  a fair  comparison.  In this  way, capability   ﬂexibility   of  the DRL can be identiﬁed   from  the comparison. 
Figs. 5–7 display  the  optimized   lane markings  for  DRL, TTI, and CTP from the  model, and  Table 3 shows  the optimized
signal timings.
     The simulation   package  VISSIM is used as the  unbiased  evaluator  to  capture  the  stochastic  variation   of traffic   ﬂow  and
evaluate the  performance  of different   control  strategies.  To overcome  the stochastic  nature  of  a microscopic  simulation   system, 
an average of 20 simulation   runs  has been used. Three performance  indices,  including  the  total  throughput,   the average
vehicular  delay, and  the maximum   queue length  in  the internal   link,  have been selected  to compare  DRL, TTI and CTP under
different  demand  levels.  Simulation   and comparison   results  are shown  in  Fig. 8.
     It can  be observed  that  when  traffic  demand  level  is low  or  medium,  all  three  control   plans are  comparable  in terms   of
total throughput;    while  DRL and TTI outperform   CTP in average delay and maximumqueue    lengths.  When  the demand  level
is high,   the  DRL control   clearly   outperforms    TTI and   CTP with   signiﬁcantly    higher  total   throughput    (11.4%  and  13.1%
improvement)   and lower  average delays  (68.7% and 70.9% reduction). The maximumqueue    length  in  the internal   link  under
the DRL control, though  slightly   higher  compared  with  the TTI four  phase operation,  is still  within   the storage  capacity of  the
internal  link.  Therefore,  by  dynamically   allocating  lanes  in the  internal   link  to serve  left-turn   demands  of the  two  opposite
directions,  DRL manages to  increase the  diamond  interchange   capacity  without   adding  delays  greatly.  TTI could  also avoid










                                                                    Fig. 5. Optimized lane markings for the DRL control.













                                                                     Fig. 6. Optimized lane markings for the TTI control.

10












                                                                    Fig. 7. Optimized lane markings for the CTP control.



Table 3
Optimization results of signal timings.

   Arms                                        1                     2                    3                              5                     6                      8

   Movements                              

   DRL      Cycle length (s)          120
                Start of green (s)          92       92         0         0      46       46       46       32        32        60        60       106      106      106
                Duration of green (s)    24       70       42       42      42       42       42       24        70        42        42        42         42        42
                End of green (s)          116      42       42       42       88      88       88       56      102       102      102        28        28        28

   TTI       Cycle length (s)           120
                Start of green (s)          78       78         0         0      39       39       39       18        18        60        60        99         99        99
                Duration of green (s)    38       77       35       35      35       35       35       38        77        35        35        35         35        35
                End of green (s)          116      35       35       35       74      74       74       56        95        95        95         14        14        14

   CTP      Cycle length (s)          92
                Start of green (s)          58       58         0         0      29       29       29       58        58          0          0         29        29        29
                Duration of green (s)    30       30       25       25      25       25       25       30        30        25        25        25         25        25
                End of green (s)            88      88       25       25       54      54       54       88        88        25        25         54        54        54



most  queuing  problems   and yield   high  intersection   throughput    by giving   each of  the  four  approaches  from  which   interchange 
traffic  originates  a clear phase through  both  intersections,  but  the delay  is signiﬁcantly   higher  than the  DRL. It should
be noticed that  the maximum queue length  in  the internal  link  of DRL control  is relatively  high  due to the  higher  frequency of
lane allocation,   though  it  can be managed  well  by  the optimization    model  to  ensure  reliability   of  operation.


4.2. Sensitivity analyses


     This section  investigates   the  impact  of  various  SDI geometric  conﬁgurations    and traffic   patterns  on  the  DRL operation.
Table 4  shows  the  layouts   of  nine  experimental cases. In  the  sensitivity   analysis,  we  use  equal  traffic   demand  at  each
approach for  all cases. Turning  fractions  at  the frontage  roads are  set to be 35% of left  turn,  30% of through,  and 35% of right
turn.  Turning  proportion   of left  turn  and through   on the surface  street  is set to range  from  5% to 75%, and right turn  proportion 
is set at  25%. All other model  parameters  are kept the  same as in Section 4.1. Performances  of DRL, TTI, and CTP are compared under  all  
experimental   cases.
     Fig. 9 summarizes  the analysis  results  with  the  x-axis of each sub-picture   representing   the proportion   of left-turn    (LT) on
the surface  streets, and  the  y-axis being  the  resulting   reserve capacity  of  SDI.
     One can observe that  both  DRL and TTI outperform   CTP in terms of improving   the  SDI capacity under  all  test cases; however 
their  performances   are shown   to be  affected  by many  factors,  including   the  number  of  lanes in  the  internal   link,  the
length of  the internal   link, and  the proportion   of left  turns.  There exhibits  an obvious  descending  trend  in SDI capacity  under
TTI control  with  the  increase  of left-turn   proportion    on the  surface-street;  while   the capacity  under  DRL remains  relatively
stable. This  is primarily   due  to  the fact  that  setting   dynamic  reversible  lanes  improves  the  level  of ﬂexibility    of  the  SDI to
accommodate  turning   traffic  demand.  Therefore, the  DRL control  is shown  to  outperform   the TTI in  improving   SDI capacity
when  the left-turn    proportion   on the  surface-street   is high.
     When  the length   of the  internal  link   is short  (see Fig. 9a–c), the  DRL outperforms  TTI in  terms  of  SDI capacity. With   the
increase of  the  internal  link   length,  the  SDI capacity  under  DRL decreases but  the  capacity  under  TTI remains  unchanged,
indicating   that  when   the  internal   link  is  sufﬁciently    long  (more  than  150  m),  the  TTI operation   is  better.  This  is  due to
the fact  that  longer  internal   link  requires  increased  clearance time   for reversible   lane operations.

11




        
           

                      Low-volume scenario           Medium-volume scenario           High-volume scenario

                                                              Fig. 8. Performance evaluation results.



Table 4
Experimental cases.

   Scenario Number of approach lanes Number of exit lanes Number of lanes in the internal link Length of the internal link (m)





    It is also interesting to ﬁnd that the DRL has the potential to improve the capacity of SDI evenwhen thenumber of lanes in
the internal link is unequal for both directions. Table 5 summarizes the comparison of throughput at the SDI (the one used in
Section 4.1) under the operation of CTP, TTI, and DRL with different number of internal link lanes. The SDI is assumed to be
operated under a high traffic demand level shown in Table 6, and is due for an enhancement to improve its current operation.
A total of 8 candidate enhancement plans are designed. Plans 1–3 keep the number of lanes in the internal link unchanged
and use CTP, TTI, and DRL to operate the SDI; plans 4–6 add only one lane in the internal link and use CTP, TTI, and DRL to
operate the SDI; and plans 7–8 add two lanes in the internal link using CTP and TTI. One can observe in Table 5 that the DRL
with only one lane added (plan 6) outperforms all other candidate plans in terms of total throughput at the SDI. Even

12


 
                      Proportion of LTs from surface street Proportion of LTs from surface street Proportion of LTs from surface street
                               DRL   TTI    CTP                              DRL   TTI    CTP                              DRL   TTI    CTP
                       



  
    

    Proportion of LTs from surface street Proportion of LTs from surface street Proportion of LTs from surface street

                            DRL   TTI    CTP                              DRL   TTI    CTP                              DRL   TTI    CTP
   



                                                                              65 

                                                                                                                                                                                   70 

           
                      Proportion of LTs from surface street Proportion of LTs from surface street Proportion of LTs from surface street
                               DRL   TTI    CTP                              DRL   TTI    CTP                              DRL   TTI    CTP
                                                            

           number of approach & exit lanes = 3 number of approach & exit lanes = 3 number of approach & exit lanes = 4
           number of lanes in the internal link = 6 number of lanes in the internal link = 7 number of lanes in the internal link = 8

                                                          Fig. 9. Performance comparison among DRL, TTI and CTP.


Table 5
Comparison of throughputs at the SDI with different number of internal link lanes.

   Plans                                                                                                  Throughput (vehs)           Difference with plan 6 (%)

   Plan 1               Original design + CTP (6 lanes in the internal link)   6330                                
   Plan 2               Original design + TTI (6 lanes in the internal link)    6421                                 
   Plan 3               Original design + DRL (6 lanes in the internal link)   7376                                
   Plan 4               Adding one lane  (7 lanes in the internal link) 6417                                
   Plan 5               Adding one lane + (7 lanes in the internal link)  6504                                 
   Plan 6               Adding one lane  (7 lanes in the internal link) 8110                                
   Plan 7               Adding two lanes  (8 lanes in the internal link) 6761                               
   Plan 8               Adding two lanes  (8 lanes in the internal link) 7520                                 



Table 6
Traffic demand for throughput analysis.

   

13



compared  with  plans  that  add two  lanes in  the  internal  link   (plans 7  and 8), plan  6 yields  signiﬁcantly   higher throughputs.
This is primarily   due to the  fact that  the added one  lane could be set as the reversible  lane  used by different  directions   during
different  periods  of a signal  cycle under  the DRL while  TTI and CTP only favor  the direction   with   more lanes. Such an advantage 
of DRL is  particularly   useful  for  interchange   enhancement  where  the  limited   available  space prevents  the  addition   of
more than  one  lane in  the  internal  link.


5. Conclusion


     A new  design  and  operation  of  signalized   diamond  interchange   with   frontage  roads  using  dynamic  reversible   lanes is
developed in  this  paper with   the objective   to increase  capacity  and relieve  congestion  at the  SDI with  limited   storage space
between  the  two  closely  joined  intersections   coupled  with   heavy traffic   volumes.  A Binary-Mixed-Integer-Linear-Program
(BMILP) is formulated   to  simultaneously   optimize   lane  markings,  dynamic   usage of the  reversible  lane,  and signal  timings
for the  new SDI system.  Numerical  analyses  are conducted  to evaluate  the  performance  the  proposed  design and compared
it with  the  Texas Transportation  Institute   four-phase  plan  (TTI) and the common  three-phase  plan  (CTP) under different
traffic demand  levels  and geometric   conﬁgurations,   from  which  the  following   conclusions   could be  drawn:


    (1)  The new design  outperforms   CTP under all test scenarios  in terms  of increasing  the  capacity of  a diamond  interchange
          (up  to 37% improvement   of capacity).  Whencompared   with   the TTI control,  the  new design  yields better  performance
          (up  to 30% improvement   of capacity)   when the  left-turn   proportion   on  the surface-street   exceeds 20% and the length
          of  the internal   link  is within   150  m. Thus, it  is particularly   promising   for  use at diamond   interchanges  with  very  limited
          space for  expansion.
    (2)  The new  design  is shown  to  be effective  in  reducing  average  delays at  the diamond   interchange  under  medium   and
          high   traffic  demand   levels.  The highest  reduction   is  achieved  at  the  highest   demand  level,  resulting   in  68.7% and
          70.9% reduction   of delay  time  compared   with  TTI and  CTP, respectively.  Thus, the  new  design  is very  promising   for
          use at  diamond  interchanges   experiencing  heavy  traffic   volumes  and high  delays.
    (3)  Under  high  traffic  demand  levels,  substantial   improvement   in  the  SDI throughput   could  be  achieved  by adding  just
          one  lane in  the  internal  link   and operating   with  the  DRL. Such an advantage  of the  new  design is  particularly   useful
          for  interchange   enhancement  where  the  limited   available  space prevents   the addition   of  more  than  one lane  in  the
          internal   link.


     It should  be noted  that  the  new DRL system  has the ﬂexibility    of working   part  time  in  real world   applications,  only  activated  
when  needed  (e.g. high  volume   and  overﬂow).   With   the  advance  of vehicle-infrastructure-integration        technology,
more precise control  of  vehicles entering  the  internal  link  wouldbecome   possible  to further   enhance the operational   reliability  
of the  new  DRL system. However,  since  the  proposed  DRL design is new,  the  ill-intentioned    drivers   might  cause safety
problem,  careful  driver  behavior   studies and  adequate  driver  education  have  to be  carried  out  before the  new  DRL system
is perfected  and implemented    in the  ﬁeld.  Vehicle  detectors  could  be used to  control  vehicles  entering  the  reversible  lanes
in practice  and  ensure the  operation   reliability   of  the DRL control.
