1



Urban sustainable transportation planning strategies for livable City's quality of life


                                                 ABSTRACT

Urban planning and its relevant transportation deploying have a particularly profound influence on the sustainability 
and livability of a city, and which also be crucial to the quality of life to urban residents at the same
time. It was also suggested that the conception of livability should be extended to embrace the concerns associated 
with the sustainability. However, planning frameworks or assessment patterns that address the dynamics
of urban planning and demand for transportation deploying are relatively rare; there also few public policies in
related research ﬁelds have discussed the effects of the changes in various assessment indicators over time.
Furthermore, following the rising advancements in social communication and computer technologies in modern
society, the data collection, storage, and processing capabilities of people have improved substantially. And, the
emergence of big data or extendible open data facilitates analysis and prediction availability, and enabled people
to ﬁnd immediate solutions to numerous dilemmas encountered. Therefore, based on the aforementioned intention, 
treating the city as a dynamic process with the trying of introducing the big data or extendible open data
for facilitating urban sustainability and livability is undoubtedly worth to explore in further.
The present study intends to initially examine the application of big data in sustainable and livable transportation 
strategies in Taipei City, Taiwan. Firstly, we investigate previous research on transportation sustainability 
in various countries to generalize our preliminary list of transportation sustainability indices that satisfy
the principles of livable cities. And, key indices were then selected through the Fuzzy Delphi Method by ad-
ministering a questionnaire to six experts from industrial, governmental, and academic sectors respectively. The
research results were applied to develop decision-making strategies for responding to the environmental dynamics of 
Taipei City's transportation infrastructure system by using the analytic network process combined with
a data-mining technique. Thus, big data pertaining to urban transportation were analyzed to predict the future
dynamic trends of the key indices and prioritize the sustainable transportation strategies for a livable city under
dynamic temporal and spatial changes. Ultimately, the policy implications of this study can not only offer a
solution for current needs related to urban planning but also serve as a more transparent decision-making or well
selection basis for developing sustainable and livable urban life in near future.






Keywords:
Sustainability   
Livability 
Fuzzy Delphi method 
Big data
Extendible open data
Dynamic network process

1.  Introduction                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                        
     Although  rapid  socioeconomic development has accelerated world        
urbanization and advanced technological progress to shape the today or     
even tomorrow  cities  (Newman, Beatley, &  Boyer, 2009;  Newman  &        
Kenworthy, 2015), it  has also placed a sizeable burden and destruction      
on the urban sustainability and livability.   Previously, in order to  create             
an urban ideal environment, Jane Jacobs, a great and extremely famous     
urban scholar advocated the avant-garde  concept of human-scale and        
the beauty of  urban smallness to facilitate  the cities  more livable  and        
habitable (Gans, 2006; Laurence, 2006).  Recently, Professor Geoffrey        
West who was included in  Time Magazine's 2006 list  of the  100 most        
inﬂuential  people in  the world  also strongly promoted a grand uniﬁed
theory which  treat  the  cities  as living  organisms (Bettencourt,  Lobo,
Helbing,  Kühnert,  & West,  2007; West,  2010) for  understanding  the
relationship  between human engineered systems as well as the natural
environment, and attempt to  guide us toward the more sustainable and
livable  urban life  (Bettencourt &  West, 2010).
Sustainability  and livability   are both  the most important   and ultimate 
goals that  urban life  pursues as just mentioned. It  was also sug-
gested that the conception of livability should be broadened to embrace
the concerns associated with the sustainability (Fidler, Olson, & Bezold,
2011). To the livability   and sustainability of  cities, urban planning and
its relevant  transportation deploying  have a particularly  profound  and



2


positive effect (Taki, Maatouk, Qurnfulah, & Aljou ﬁ e, 2017; Wey, 2015;       
Wey & Chiu,  2013; Wey,  Zhang, & Chang, 2016),  and which  also be
crucial  to  the  quality   of  life  to  urban   residents at  the  same time.         
However, planning frameworks or assessment patterns that address the
dynamics of urban planning  and demand for  transportation  deploying        
are relatively  rare.  And,  most urban  planning  frameworks  or assessments 
in related  ﬁ elds focus speciﬁcally on evaluating environmental              
impacts  and  constructing   speciﬁc  analytical   frameworks   (Deakin,        
Curwell, & Lombardi, 2002;  Shepherd & Ortolano, 1996; Xing, Horner,        
El-Haram, & Bebbington, 2009)  rather than  considered the essence of       
urban development as a dynamic or evolutional  process.                            
     Furthermore,  following  the  rising advancements in  social communication  
and computer  technologies in  modern society,  the data  collection, storage, 
and  processing capabilities of  people have improved        
substantially.  Additionally,   the emergence of  big  data  or  extendible        
open data also facilitates analysis validity,  and  enabled people to ﬁnd        
immediate solutions  to  numerous dilemmas  encountered. This  background is 
extremely  vital  in  utilizing  the  big data  or extendible  open       
data to   formulate  sustainable  and  livable  transportation   strategies,       
which invariably   change over time.  Considering the time-dependency        
of decision-making  indices  (Saaty, 2007)  and  the  immediacy  or extensibility 
of big  data (i.e. extendible  open data), we thus  applied dynamic network 
process in conjunction with  data-mining  techniques to              
treat urban  development as a dynamic  or  evolutional  process (Batty,        
2017; Batty  & Marshall,  2017), and  the consequent changes with dynamic or 
evolutional   process invariably   cause shifts  in  demand for         
urban planning and relevant  transportation deploying.  In other  words,        
the effects of such shifts over time should be considered and highlighted      
in order  to formulate  and  reform more  appropriate urban  transportation 
development  strategies to our  cities  or even whole  metropolitan area.                                                                                                                
     Based on the  aforementioned intention,   treating the  city  as a dynamic 
process with the trying of  introducing the  big data or extendible        
open data  for   facilitating   urban  sustainability   and  livability   is  undoubtedly 
worth to explore in further. In this study, we primarily  intend         
to initially   examine the  application  of  big data  in sustainable and  livable 
transportation  strategies in Taipei City,  Taiwan. This paper proceeds as follows.  
Firstly,  we  investigate previous  research on  transportation   sustainability
in    various   countries   to    generalize   our              
preliminary  list of  transportation  sustainability  indices that satisfy the         
principles of livability.   Secondly, to systematically present the opinions       
of all  experts and integrate  the consensus of all experts scientiﬁcally,        
the  key  indices  were  selected  through   the  Fuzzy  Delphi  method.        
Considering the  professional  ﬁelds  of  the  experts  and  their  understanding 
of the  transportation  status of Taipei  City, two  experts from         
the industrial, governmental, and academic sectors were selected (six in      
total)  to  answer  the  questionnaires.  Thirdly,   the  existing  temporal        
quantitative  data of the  seven key sustainability and  livability   indices       
which constructed  by Fuzzy Delphi  method were collected.  Then, the        
time-series analysis was performed  to establish  an autoregressive integrated moving 
average model  (ARIMA)  for each  index in  order  to        
calculate the  rate of  change in  each index from  the  2009/Q2  to  the        
2016/Q4 (31 quarters in total).  The rate of change in each index would        
be applied to reveal  the dynamic  weight changes in data-oriented  dynamic network 
process to express the dynamic  concept of  indices or         
alternatives that change over time.  Thus, big data pertaining  to  urban             
transportation  were analyzed to  predict the  future  dynamic trends  of        
the key indices and prioritize  the sustainable and livable  strategies for        
our empirical area under dynamic temporal and spatial changes. On the      
other  hand,  the  research results were  applied  to   develop decision-        
making  strategies for  responding to  the  environmental   dynamics of        
Taipei City's transportation  infrastructure   system by using a  dynamic        
network process combined with   a data-mining  technique. Ultimately,         
the policy  implications  of this  study  can not only  offer  a solution  for        
current  needs related  to  urban  planning   but  also  serve as a  more        
transparent  decision-making  or  well   selection  basis for   developing        
sustainable and livable urban life  in near future.

2.  Literature   review  and  research background

2.1.  Sustainable and livable cities

Sustainable transportation   involves  applying  the  concept  of  sustainable development
 to  the planning  and development of  transportation   infrastructure.   
For  example,  Black  (1996)  deﬁned  sustainable
transportation  as  “satisfying  the  current  transportation  and mobility
 needs without  sacriﬁcing the ability  of future generations to meet these
needs”. The  OECD, Institute  of  Transportation  in  Taiwan,  and Reisi
et  al. (2014)  have  indicated  that  sustainable transportation  must  be
able to  respond to the concurrent and long-term environmental,  social,
and economic  needs and impacts.  This has  been supported by  most
related  studies. In  2009,  Taiwan's Institute  of  Transportation  further
explained  these three  dimensions of  sustainable transportation.   The
environmental   dimension requires  considering the  external effects  of
transportation;  the  social dimension requires equally  satisfying the interests 
of  residents at  various socioeconomic levels  when  improving
transportation;  the  economic dimension requires efficiently   using and
conserving resources.
Because the abstract nature of the aforementioned  principles, speciﬁc 
development strategies and assessment indices must be formulated
to  further  assess the importance and beneﬁts of  sustainable transportation. 
Santos and  Ribeiro  (2013)   indicated  that  indices  should  be
created to reduce the complexity of sustainable development, maintain
scientiﬁc objectivity, and  improve  communication  processes. Studies
from  various disciplines  have been conducted to  establish indices for
sustainable transportation   over  the  years. In   2002,  the  Institute  of
Transportation  in  Taiwan  formulated  9  goals and 47  indices encompassing 
the  dimensions of economic efficiency,  environmental  protection,  
and social equity according to the index categorization by the UN.
Because that study did not cover all topics related to transportation, the
dimension of energy use was later included as an additional dimension
in  2005.  Subsequently, a composite sustainable transportation  assessment 
index system comprising 24 quantitative and 3 qualitative indices
encompassing nine goals was formulated.
Acknowledging that  the  selection of  indices has a profound  inﬂuence 
on research results, Litman and  Burwell  (2006) aggregated conventional 
transportation  quality   indices and  simple sustainability indices  
according   to  their   convenience  and  comprehensiveness and
constructed  a composite  sustainable transportation  index  that covers
the  economic,  social,  and  environmental  dimensions  of  sustainable
transportation. To identify  a framework that  integrates the information
from multiple  sources to evaluate transportation sustainability, Awasthi
and  Chauhan (2011)   incorporated  the analytic   hierarchy  process to
deﬁne nine indices that  involved   the social,  transportation,  environmental, 
energy, and  economical dimensions of sustainable transportation;  
subsequently, numerous data sources (e.g., expert questionnaires,
sensors, and models) were applied  to evaluate sustainable transportation strategies.  
To  assess sustainable transportation   strategies  implemented in Taipei City, 
Shiau (2012) proposed a composite index that
incorporated the social, economic, environmental, energy, and ﬁnancial
dimensions of sustainable transportation.
After  integrating  the  transportation  indices from  previous studies,
Santos and Ribeiro (2013) selected 20 indices for the social, economic,
and environmental  dimensions of  sustainable transportation  and preliminarily 
determined their importance on  the basis of how frequently
they  appeared in previous studies. For example, CO2 emissions, energy
consumption,  traffic   accidents, safety, and  accessibility were  key  indices that 
had appeared  in  approximately   70% of   the  investigated
studies. Finally, cases of urban development were used to examine the
applicability   of sustainable development indices in  Rio de Janeiro. To
eliminate  unnecessary indices, Reisi, Aye, Rajabifard, and Ngo (2014)
reviewed   previous   studies   and   estimated   the   existing   data   of
                                                                                                                   10

3



Melbourne, Australia,  to  create nine  transportation  sustainability indices 
encompassing environmental, social, and  economic dimensions;       
these indices were then integrated into  a single composite index.                
     In  addition,  regarding  the  urban livability,    Jane Jacobs probably        
was the most famous proponent and in ﬂuential activist in the history of        
American city planning.  In The Death and Life of Great American Cities,     
published in 1961,  Jacobs advocated the construction of  livable cities        
with  abundant street  life  and commercial  and cultural  diversity.   She       
stated that  only  a  diverse  human-scale community  can  lead  to  the        
foundation of a simple  yet great city.  Subsequently, many government       
agencies or research institutions in  recent also put  forward  their  own        
understanding and views. For example, in Cities in a Globalizing World:       
Global Report on Human Settlements, the ﬁrst global report of the United   
Nations (UN) Human Settlements Program stated that the provision  of        
public  infrastructure,  equal  opportunities  for  medical  and education        
services, and safe and comfortable  community  environments  are the         
prerequisites for building a livable city.  The U.S. Metropolitan Planning        
Commission (MPC) reported that a city must develop safe, reliable, and       
economically  feasible  transportation   options  to  lower   the  costs of         
household transportation,  reduce  national  reliance  on imported   raw        
petroleum,  and  improve  air  quality.   In  Singapore, the  Urban  Land        
Institute  and   Center  for  Liveable   Cities  also  maintained   that  environmentally 
friendly   transportation  systems must be established to         
eliminate traffic  pollution  and congestion, which undermine the quality        
of a city's livability.                                                                                           
     Moreover,  Evans (2002)  addressed livelihood  and ecological  sustainability 
as two  aspects of  city  livability.    Livelihood  indicates  satisfactory 
living  conditions.  When the lifestyles  of city  residents cause       
environmental decline, the  quality  of life  of residents is diminished.  A             
livable city  satisﬁes the livelihood  needs of all its  residents under the        
prerequisites  of  ecological   environmental   protection.  Fidler   et   al.        
(2011) also emphasized that  many urban  illness or  social threats, including 
urban  sprawl,  rising  energy costs, climate  change, and ﬁscal       
challenges are likely to work against efforts to make communities more        
livable. On the basis of these ﬁndings, we should develop strategies that    
counter these negative illness or threats while also improving our urban       
life. In  the most  recent period,  Zhan et al.  (2018)  conducted a large-scale 
questionnaire survey on 40 major cities in China in order to ﬁll the      
gaps of past studies for urban  livability.   The results show that  the six        
dimensions of urban  livability   (including  public  facilities,  natural  environment, 
socio-cultural  environment,  urban security,  environmental         
health, and  convenient  transportation)  have  signiﬁcant and  positive        
impacts upon  overall  satisfaction with  urban  livability,   of  which  the        
natural environment,  convenient transportation,  environmental  health        
are the greatest contributing  factors.                                                              
     In  summary, most studies have maintained that a livable  city  must        
encompass numerous aspects such as economic  development, social it  
security, environmental  conservation,  history  and culture,  and  transportation.  
And,   transportation   planning  is  crucial   for   constructing        
public  infrastructure;  the  diversity,  safety, convenience, and  sustainability  
of transportation  activities  are vital  for  a strong, fair,  and efficient 
living  environment as well as the livability  of a city.  On the other        
hand, sustainable transportation   is any  transportation  mode that  satisﬁes 
current  transportation  needs without   sacriﬁcing the  needs of        
future  generations, the  evaluation  of  which  involves  environmental,        
social, and economic  dimensions. The  environmental  dimension emphasizes 
ecological conservation and alternative  energy development;        
the social dimension emphasizes equality and safety; the economic dimension 
emphasizes the balance between cost and effciency  and the        
improvement of economic competitiveness.                                                    
                                                                                                                         
2.2. Big data and its applications                                                                     
                                                                                                                         
     The popularity   and tide  of big  data have resulted  in  the development 
and applications of technologies and methods aimed at effectively           
using  massive  amounts  of   data   to   support  decision-making   and        
knowledge discovery activities  (Storey & Song, 2017). For example, in
the  context  of  smart  sustainable cities,  big data  analytics  denotes a
collection   of  sophisticated  and  dedicated software  applications  and
database systems run by machines with   very high  processing power,
which can turn a large amount of  urban data into useful knowledge for
well-informed   decision-making  and  enhanced  insights  pertaining  to
various  urban  domains, such  as transport,  mobility,   traffic,  environment, 
energy, land use, planning,  and design (Bibri &  Krogstie, 2017).

Despite attention   and  embrace from  many  scientiﬁc  researchers or
ﬁelds, the deﬁnition of big data is still highly controversial and remains
ambiguous. One of the major widely  debate is that  the meaning of big
data is  not accurate enough.  Due to big  data which  may  means data
itself  are too big or large that  could not be processed easily in the past,
but  which  maybe could calculate smoothly  through  the amateur software 
and hardware now  (Manovich, 2011).  Thus, big data itself  is, in
many ways, a poor term  with  no precisely deﬁned (Boyd  & Crawford,
2012; Manovich, 2011).  On the other  hand, the meaning or  deﬁnition
of big data suggests that data are too big or large only in relation to our
current computational  power  rather than  exact deﬁning characteristic
of this new data ecosystem (Floridi, 2012). In fact, some of the big data
that  we praise  highly  now (e.g.,  Twitter  messages about a particular
topic)  are not even larger than the census data (e.g., government open
data about the socio-economic survey) that were not recognized as big
data in  the early days (Boyd  & Crawford, 2012).  As described by Professor 
Michael Batty, a renowned British urban planner  and scientist of
complex  urban  systems, big  data  are data  bodies  that  expand continually 
and thus continue to  challenge the capacities of data  analysis tools (Batty,  2013).

According  to the  discussion aforementioned, we thus ﬁnd  another
major widely  debate is that big data should not only  refer to very large
data sets, but also to the tools and procedures used to manipulate  and
analyze them (Boyd &  Crawford, 2012).  In other  words, the  most important 
value of big  data does not rely on  the amount or  quantities of
data itself. As described by Professor Geoffrey West, a renowned British
theoretical  physicist  and  scientist of  grand uniﬁed theory  of  sustainability 
(West, 2010),  science is meritocratic and not  all data are equal
(West, 2017). In some extreme situations, we even must try to eliminate
large part  of  data sets that  is  useless and may confuse experimental
results (e.g., the  discovery of  the  Higgs boson and top  quark).  Thus,
maybe for  most scienti ﬁc ﬁelds,  we have to  put  our main  effort  and
focus on exploring or mining  critical  parts that  hidden in  data sets via
design  techniques,  analytical   tools,  execution  procedures,  decision
support systems, or even creative solution  algorithms  (Chang, Wey, &
Tseng, 2009; Janssen & Kuk,  2016;  Lai &  Huang, 2017;  Wey &  Wu,
2007) rather than the dominate  characteristic of 5Vs (volume, velocity,
variety, veracity,  and value) or precise de ﬁnition of the big data. Then,
thus would  inform  or even enhanced decision making as well  as future 
strategies we needed, especially in the situation of new urban data
streams generating rapidly (Batty,  2012).

Another major widely debate about big data or  large dataset is that
may lead to  decision paralysis,  or at  least decision delay, that  is, the
allure  of  data encourages decision makers  to wait   more possible information 
(Håkonsson &  Carroll, 2016). And, the delayed decisions may
ultimately  not  be applicable to rapidly  changing urban systems (Batty,
2012). Although  it seems that big data makes it possible for us to collect
more data to  ﬁnd  more useful information,  the truth  is that  more data
do not necessarily mean more useful information.  It may contain more
ambiguous or abnormal data (Tsai, Lai, Chao, & Vasilakos, 2015; West,
2017). Therefore, bigger data (more data) that we wait for or search for
are not  always better  data (Boyd  &  Crawford,  2012).  Moreover, the
above decision scenarios also speciﬁcally alert that there is a tendency
pursuing  more data  that  just  due  to  decision makers  could  (easily)
obtain, not because the data would facilitate or enable decision makers
to make the right  or  better decisions (Håkonsson & Carroll, 2016).
As  discussed above, although  there are  still  many  questions and
controversies that still need to be resolved, the cooperation between big



                                                                                                                   11

4



                                                                                

data and urban development is still booming and continues to advance.       
Numerous types  of  datasets are  applied  to  research  on  urban  and        
transportation  planning.  Considering  the importance  of  dynamic  information  
in   understanding  urban  spaces, Soto  and  Frias-Martinez        
(2011)  used mobile  phone data  from  urban spaces and defined ﬁve       
clusters of land use. Examples of big data being applied to research on       
travel routes include  time-series global  positioning  system data being        
used to analyze the travel routes of  taxicabs (Zheng, Liu, Yuan, & Xie,        
2011), smart card systems—the usage of which has increased as a fee-payment 
mechanism in  urban  public  transportation— have  been employed 
in several studies to investigate the temporospatial dynamics of        
urban  public  transportation   trips  (Bagchi  &  White,  2005;  Pelletier,        
Trépanier,  &  Morency,  2011).  Social  media  data,  although  having         
emerged only  recently,  have  expanded  rapidly  and  now  provide   a       
massive source of big data for real-time information on  travel patterns,        
such as transportation information  from  the keywords in  social media        
(Gal-Tzur et al., 2014).                                                                                   
     Recently, it  is  worth  to note  that various  scientiﬁc innovations  in              
urban development  ﬁeld  are  ﬂourishing   especially between  cutting-edge 
technologies  and  its   emerging  requirements  (Alazawi,   Alani,        
Abdljabar, Altowaijri,   & Mehmood, 2014;  Mehmood & Graham, 2015;        

Suma, Mehmood, Albugami,  Katib, &  Albeshri, 2017).  Often  of these        
cutting-edge technologies  and  its emerging  requirements  claim  that        
they could promote the  sustainability and livability   of the  city or even       
make the city,  society  or environment  smarter.  For example, Ahmad         
and Mehmood  (2016)  suggested that future  cities  are driven  by  the        
developments in  Information  and  Communication Technology  in  further, 
and  logistics will   play  a critical  role  in  future  cities  due to  the
increasingly  micro-dynamic   nature of  socio-economic and  globalised
production and consumption patterns. Schlingensiepen, Mehmood, and
Nemtanu   (2015)   and   Schlingensiepen,  Nemtanu,   Mehmood,   and
McCluskey  (2016)  also  emphasized the  application   and  beneﬁts of
cutting-edge technology. Coincidentally, they  both believed that future
cities  will  be driven  through  advanced complex ICT systems (i.e., autonomic 
transport management system) that harness the power of data
collected  from distributed  network  of sensors in order  to provide  personalized 
information and services to its consumers under sustainability
and other constraints. In similar  way, Naim and Rashid (2015) declared
enterprise systems and supply chain management systems as a critical
part  of smart  city setting could  facilitate  sustainability  and have a positive 
impact  on corporate  ﬁnancial  returns.   Therefore,  enterprises
should pay  more attention  to the three  dimensions 
(i.e., economy, society and environment) of sustainability.

Fig. 1. The goal and research design of this study.

Due to   the  industry-driven,   top-down,   design approaches  completely 
ignore the  self-organization, the  self-sustaining structures, and
the complexity  of urban systems (Batty, 2008; Batty &  Marshall, 2017;
Bettencourt et al., 2007), Naim and Rashid (2015) also deeply reﬂected
that the  ICT-based and industry-driven approaches maybe are not the
only  solution  for  urbanization   and future  city  designs. Based on the
above  insightful   rethinking  and  re ﬂ ecting, we thus  realize  that  the
common ground and means of ICT-based or industry-driven approaches
often   tend  to  directly   achieved  sustainability or livability through




                                                                                                                   12

5
                                                                                                                                     

innovative technologies, mechanisms or intelligent   systems. When enjoying  
great  technological  convenience and  business beneﬁts  aforementioned, 
however,  we  have to  notice  that  the  implementation   of              
these innovative technologies, mechanisms or even intelligent  systems             
requires a  lot  of data  resources, hardware architecture,  construction               
cost as well  as probably  facing more  unknown  risks or  complexities.              
Comparing to traditional   planning, these innovative  technologies, mechanisms 
or intelligent  systems may be necessary to assessment carefully 
via relevant experts or  research institutions in  further.                          
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                               
3.  Research design
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                               
     The goal of this  study was to establish transportation sustainability                                                                                      
indices for a  livable city,  to  predict their  future  dynamics, and to  formulate 
sustainable urban transportation strategies that  fulﬁll  the time-dependency of the indices. 
The research design (Fig. 1) is described in the following  four  steps:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
     Step 1 Collect and review literature on livable  cities and sustainable                                                                                                                         
transportation  worldwide.  Examine and analyze the  literature  to generalize a 
list of  transportation  sustainability  assessment indices for a livable city.
Step 2 Select the applicable indices for the proposed research model                                                                                                                              
and the  conditions of  the  area of  empirical  study through  the  Fuzzy                                                                                                                              
Delphi Method (FDM). Generalize the dependency relations among the                                                                                                                              
indices for the subsequent modeling process.                                                                                                                         
     Step 3 Use data mining to analyze the transportation data to predict                                                                                                                          
dynamic changes in the indices over time. Operationalize these changes                                                                                                                            
in  the  DNP by  examining  the priorities   of  the  urban  transportation                                                                                                                               
sustainability  indices to develop a questionnaire  survey for a  panel of
experts. Analyze the  results of  the  data-oriented and  expert-oriented                                                                                                                             
DNPs and compare the ﬁ ndings. For further application of  the rates of                                                                                                                       
changes in the  index data and to identify  current index weights and                                                                                                              
predict future weight changes, this study investigated  the raw data                                                                                                                    
through  a time-series  analysis, a data-mining  tool that is frequently                                                                                                   
used to predict  continuous  variable  processes. This was employed to                                                                                                                         
establish a prediction model for each index. The DNPproposed by Saaty                                                                                                                         
(2007) can be applied  in  sturctural or  functional  form.  The structural                                                                                                                              
form  incorporates different time  points  as alternative  programs  and                                                                                                                         
compares the criteria  with  the programs in  pairs. The functional  DNP                                                                                                                        
involves using the  standard dynamic judgment  matrix  A(t), which  explicitly 
includes the functions of time. The typical  form of  a judgment
                                                                                                                         
matrix in  dynamic form  is:
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         



     As   in   the   discrete  case,  when       is   consistent,  we   have
                                                                                                                         
The  functional  DNP, which  explicitly  incorporates
time variables,  clariﬁes the dynamic  weight  curve  of each factor  according 
to the  relative  rate  of  change in  each factor  over  time,  the                                                                                                                        
ﬁndings of which are then assessed by experts.                                             
     Step 4 Generalize and discuss the processes and results of the empirical 
analysis  and  propose suggestions on  formulating  sustainable
transportation strategies for  the livable city  examined in  this study.
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         
4.  Empirical   study and  analysis                                                                   
                                                                                                                         
4.1. Area and range of the empirical study                                                      
                                                                                                                         
     An area that fulﬁlls  the goal and model of this study was selected for      
the empirical  study.  Considering the  environmental,  social,  and economic 
dimensions under investigation, Taipei City (Fig. 2) was selected
as the area of the empirical  study for the  following  reasons:
(a)  Taipei City is the political, economic, and cultural center of Taiwan.
The total population  of Taipei City in October 2014 was 2,697,644.
Data from  that  year show that  residents owned 286 cars and 385
motorcycles  per 1000  population   in  2013. Thus,  the  number  of
private vehicle trips in  Taipei City is high. Moreover, the population
concentration   is  also  high,   and  residents  experience  difficulty
commuting  between   New  Taipei   City  and   Taipei  City. These
transportation  needs require immediate attention.

(b) Urban  development  strategies for  Taipei City  must  promote harmony 
between humans and nature, a balance between the cityscape
and nature,  and  macroeconomic objectives, social  harmony,  and
ecologically virtuous cycle. Therefore, the Taipei City Government's
vision for  future  development is focused on foresight, pleasure, livability, 
culture, ecology, information, and safety. White Paper on
Transportation Policies from  the  2020 Program for  the  Long-Term
Development in Taipei lists sustainable transportation, affinity   and
humanism, and livability and safety as the visions of development
of the city government for  formulating  the development goals and
executing the policy  strategies.

(c)  On the actual transportation construction, major development plans
for the city's public transportation network have neared completion. 
In 2013 and 2014, the Xinzhuang, Xinyi, and Songshan lines of
Taipei's mass rapid transit (MRT) network were opened, increasing
the total length  of the MRT to 129.2km.  In 2014, daily  peak traffic
was reached 1.63  million   trips. The Taipei  City Government  has
promoted a dynamic bus information system to improve the quality
of  bus services by  ﬁtting   buses with   GPS tracking  systems and
communication  devices to  provide  real-time   information  on  bus
travel times  for seamless information services.

The  Taipei  City  Government  has  also promoted  the  Taipei  Bike
Sharing System Establishment and Management Program to encourage
people to use bicycles for short trips. A  network of urban  bicycle lanes
has also been  integrated  into  the  bike  sharing system to  encourage
people to use low-pollution,  low-energy  public bicycles instead  of private motor 
vehicles for  short trips,  thereby  mitigating  traffic   congestion, 
environmental  pollution, and energy exhaustion.
In summary, the current transportation  policies implemented by the
Taipei City Government are oriented toward sustainable transportation,
and the orientation  of the urban  development also satis ﬁes the visions
of a  livable  city.  Thus, Taipei  City is  within   the scope of  this study.

Additionally,   the  city's transportation   demand is  high,  and  its  fully
developed transportation  infrastructure  provides  a massive source of
transportation   data  for   follow-up    research  procedures.  Therefore,
Taipei City was selected as the area of the empirical study to investigate
the  key indices  and  strategies satisfying  Taipei  City's  livability and
transportation sustainability.

4.2. Establishing the target system and preliminarily selecting the indices

The  following  ﬁgure shows the  sustainability  indices drawn  from
the discussed studies and applied to the livable city concept (Fig. 3) for
the follow-up  FDM and  empirical  analysis. The preliminarily   selected
indices were  based on  the  environmental,  economic,  and  social dimensions. 
The leading indices were CO2 (greenhouse gas) emissions per
unit,  nonrenewable energy  and fuel  consumption,  and air  and  noise
pollution  for  the environmental  dimension;  infrastructure,  congestion
severity,  and  household expenses on transportation  for  the  environmental dimension; 
and accessibility to public  transportation  and safety
for  social  dimension.  Other  indices  representative of  transportation
sustainability  were  the density  of  land  use, transportation  diversity,
land  consumption  in  transportation,  and  the use of  public  and  non-
motor vehicles. Table 1 lists a  description of the indices.



                                                                                                                   13

6







                                                                                               Fig.  2.  Administrative   districts  of Taipei  City.


                                                                                         Fig.  3.  Research framework of  a livable  city  concept.


                                                                                                                                   14

7

Table 1
Descriptions of the  transportation  sustainability   indices for  a livable  city.

   Dimension           Index                                                               Description

   A.Environment    A1. Greenhouse Gas Emissions                     Effective control and monitoring of greenhouse gas emission in urban transportation to reduce damage to the
                                                                                                       ecological environment and human health, thereby achieving the sustainable development of urban living and
                                                                                                       the natural environment.
                               A2. Land Consumption in Transportation       Effectively plan and manage land use in transportation to improve land resource use efficiency and mitigate the
                                                                                                       environmental impact of transportation, thereby safeguarding the quality of daily living and the natural
                                                                                                       environment.
                               A3. Energy Use                                               Develop renewable energy to reduce people's reliance on nonrenewable energies (e.g., fossil fuels) to enabling
                                                                                                       effective energy recycling, mitigate the impact of nonrenewable energy use on the environment and human
                                                                                                       health, and attain the goals of livability and sustainability.
                               A4. Air and Noise Pollution                             Effectively control and monitor noise and emissions from urban traffic to mitigate damage to the ecological
                                                                                                       environment and human health, thereby achieving sustainability in both the urban environment and the natural
                                                                                                       environment.
                               A5. Public and Non-motor Vehicle Use           Promote the use of public and non-motor transportation vehicles and reduce the use of motor vehicles to
                                                                                                       mitigate the impact of vehicles on the natural environment and attain the sustainable development of urban
                                                                                                       daily living and the natural environment.
                               A6. Density of Land Use                                 Promote high-density land use to reduce travel distances and times to lower unnecessary resource use and
                                                                                                       transportation trips and thereby improve the urban environment.
   B.Economy         B1. Infrastructures                                           Promote the transportation quality, convenience, and livability of the city through constructing a
                                                                                                       comprehensive range of transportation infrastructure services to achieve the objectives of economic efficiency
                                                                                                       and sustainability in urban transportation.
                               B2. Congestion Severity                                 Provide diverse transportation vehicles, encourage minimal use of private vehicles, and strengthen the overall
                                                                                                       transportation system network to reduce traffic congestion and improve the livability of the city, and thereby
                                                                                                       achieve the objectives of economic efficiency and sustainability in urban transportation.
                               B3. Household Expenses on Transportation  Develop diverse, safe, reliable, and economically feasible transportation options to reduce household expenses
                                                                                                       on transportation and promote the quality of daily living, thereby improving the livability and transportation
                                                                                                       efficiency of the city.
                               B4. Government Investment on                      Improve the efficiency of the government's investment in transportation infrastructure and policy, lower the
                               Transportation                                                 cost per unit of the investment, and prioritize investment in environmentally friendly transportation systems
                                                                                                       and infrastructure to improve the efficiency of resource use.
                               B5. Mixed and Use                                          Promote mixed land use to shorten travel distances and reduce the demand for commuting to reduce household
                                                                                                       expenses on transportation and improve transportation efficiency.
                               B6. Technology Application and Management Upgrade technology, improve the energy use and capacity of transportation units, and enhance the efficiency of
                                                                                                       transportation system operations, monitoring, information management, and law enforcement through
                                                                                                       innovative governance (e.g., promote the use of hybrid vehicles and smart transportation systems).
   C.Society            C1. Diversity of the Transportation System     Provide various types of transportation vehicles to satisfy the transportation needs of different groups to achieve
                                                                                                       social sustainability and enhance the livability of the city.
                               C2. Quality of the Transportation for               Consider and satisfy the basic transportation needs of disadvantaged groups (e.g., persons with disabilities,
                               Disadvantaged Groups                                   children, elderly citizens, low-income earners, and the residents in remote areas) in designing transportation
                                                                                                       systems to promote the livability of the city for all people and maintain the equality in urban development.
                               C3. Accessibility of the Public Transportation Improve the public transportation network and its accessibility and convenience to reduce the use of private
                                                                                                       vehicles, lower traffic congestion, and satisfy the basic transportation needs of all people, thereby attaining the
                                                                                                       livability of the city and the equality in its development.
                               C4. Safety                                                       Enhance road and sidewalk safety to minimize the risks of traffic accidents and casualties to mitigate the
                                                                                                       consequent social damage, thereby achieving social sustainability and enhancing the livability of the city.
                               C5. Health Impact                                           Reduce traffic pollution and accidents to mitigate their damage to public health, thereby improving the
                                                                                                       livability of the urban environment and sustainable transportation development.
                               C6. Satisfaction                                               Improve the of transportation infrastructure (e.g., roads and public and non-motor transportation vehicles) to
                                                                                                       raise public satisfaction, thereby enhancing the livability and sustainability of the urban environment.



4.3.  Using  the  FDM  to select the  transportation   sustainability    indices that             
fulﬁll   the goals  of developing  Taipei  City  as  a livable  city                                         
                                                                                                                                          
      To  establish    the   transportation      indices   and   strategies    and  objectively 
fulﬁll the  demands   of   the  area   of  the  empirical     study   and  the          
considerations   of  planners   to identify    the  most  appropriate    and efficient            
indices     and    strategies,      the    transportation        sustainability indices           
(Table  1.)   were  examined   through    an  FDM  expert   questionnaire    to  afﬁrm 
the  objectivity     of  the   indices   for  further    strategic   planning. Considering 
the  professional    ﬁ elds of the  experts  and  their   understanding    of
the transportation     status  of  Taipei  City,   two  experts  from   the  industrial,            
governmental,    and  academic   sectors   were  selected   (six  in  total)   to  answer  
the  questionnaires.
      Table   2   depicts   the   questionnaire      results.   The   expert    consensus                
value  Gi  is  >   6  for  most   of  the  indices.   In  other   words,   all  18  indices           
were   considerably     representative     of   transportation       sustainability      in          
Taipei  City.   However,   for  the  operability    of  future   studies,  these  indices          
were  selected   from   the   steepest  region   of   the  consensus  curve   as  the          
threshold    value.   The  three   regions    with   the   largest   differences  in   Gi         
values   on  the   curve   are   listed   as  follows:    (a)   accessibility     of  public           
transportation     (Index   C3)  versus  use  of  public   and  non-motor    vehicles                                                                                                           
(Index    A5),   with    a  difference   of  0.34;    (b)  health    impact    (Index   C5)
versus  diversity    of transportation     systems  (Index   C1),  with   a  difference
of  0.19;   (c)  mixed    land  use  (Index   B5)   versus  technology     application
and   management    (Index    B6),  with    a  difference   of   0.71.   To  obtain    a
suitable    number   of  selected   indices   for   the  follow-up     research   procedures  
(total    number   of  indices  selected=     7),  Index   C5  (health   impact)
was  selected   as the  threshold    in  this  study   (threshold    Value=7.30).

4.4.   Predicting  the  dynamic  trends  of  the transportation sustainability indices  through  data  mining

Temporal     quantitative     data   of   the   seven   selected   transportation
sustainability      indices   were   collected.    A  time-series    analysis   was   performed 
to  establish   an autoregressive    integrated    moving   average  model
(ARIMA)    for  each  index  in  order   to  calculate   the  rate  of change   in each
index  from   the  2009/Q2    to the  2016/Q4    (31  quarters   in  total).   Because
of  the  limitations     in  acquiring   the  index   data,  only   the  actual   available
data  could   be  used  as the  index   application    data.
For the operation and prediction consistency, the unit of




                                                                                                                                   15

8


Table 2
Index assessment results in the FDM expert  questionnaire.

   Index                                                                    Conservative     Optimistic       Singular Value (a)     Geometric Means                Certi ﬁed    Expert Consensus Value
                                                                                Value (Ci)          Value (Oi)                                                                                     Value (Zi)   (Gi)


                                                                                min       max      min     max     min           max           Ci      Oi       Singular
                                                                                                                                                                                      Value

   A1. Greenhouse Gas Emissions                          
   A2. Land Consumption in Transportation            6           8           8         10        7              9                7.13   9.47   8.14                  2.33           8.30
   A3. Energy Use                                                    5          6            8         9         7               7               5.79   8.19   7.00                  4.41           6.99
   A4. Air and Noise Pollution                                  4           8           6         10        5              9               5.71    8.19   6.53                 0.49            6.95
   A5. Use of Public and Non-motor Vehicles          4          9            8         10       6               9               6.24   8.94   7.64                  1.71           7.59
   A6. Density of Land Use                                      4           8           6         10        5              9               5.68    8.21   6.88                 0.53            6.95
   B1. Infrastructure                                                 4           7           6         10        5              8                5.67   8.28   6.90                  1.60           6.98
   B2. Congestion Severity                                      4           8           8         10        6              9                5.96   8.79   7.39                  2.83           7.37
   B3. Household Expenses on Transportation       4           8           6         10        5              9                5.60   8.07   6.99                  0.47           6.83
   B4. Government Investment on Transportation   4           8           8         10       6               9               6.19   8.81   7.44                  2.61           7.50
   B5. Mixed Land Use                                            4           6           6         9          5               7               5.28   7.93   6.29                  2.65           6.60
   B6. Technology Application and Management    4           7           6         9          5              7                4.68   7.11   5.75                  1.43           5.89
   C1. Diversity of Transportation Systems             4           8           6         10        5               8               5.99   8.23   6.90                  0.24           7.11
   C2. Quality of Transportation for Disadvantaged 4          8            6         10       5               9               5.92   8.23   7.31                  0.31           7.08
         Groups
   C3. Accessibility of Public Transportation            4          10          8         10       6               10             6.74   9.12   8.07                  0.38           7.93
   C4. Safety                                                            5           8           9         10        7              9               6.74    9.65   8.30                 3.91            8.20
   C5. Health Impact                                                4           8           7         10        6              9               6.17    8.43   7.42                 1.26            7.30
   C6. Satisfaction                                                    4          8            6         10       5               9               5.79   8.38   7.03                  0.59           7.08


Note: Grey-highlighted  areas indicate the  indices that  ful ﬁlled  the threshold.


Table 3
Descriptions of the  actual application   data of the  indices.

   Index                                      Measurement Data                                   Relationship with the Index                                         Data Source

   A1.Land Consumption in        Ratio of the amount of land used for        Reveals the extent of the importance that the city       －  Taipei Statistical Database
         Transportation                  transportation to the total amount of land government associates with transportation                 －  Department of Urban Development, Taipei
                                                  for public infrastructures                           construction and the traffic status possibly seen in the     City Government
                                                                                                                    city.
   A2.Use of Public and Non-     Rate of public and non-motor                   The promotion and use of public and non-motor         －  Statistics Inquiry, Ministry of
         motor Vehicles                 transportation vehicle use                         transportation vehicles are key criteria for the                  Transportation and Communications
                                                                                                                    livability of a city.                                                          －  Taiwan Railways Administration, Ministry
                                                                                                                                                                                                             of Transportation and Communications
                                                                                                                                                                                                         －  Taipei Rapid Transit Corporation
                                                                                                                                                                                                         －  Taipei Statistical Database
                                                                                                                                                                                                         －  Taipei Transportation Statistical System
   B1.Congestion Severity          Number of cars/motorcycles per 1000     The total number of cars and motorcycles reﬂects the － Taipei Statistical Database
                                                  population                                                 severity of traffic congestion at a certain extent.          －  Taipei Transportation Statistical System
   B2.Government Investment   Budgets of the Taipei Department of        The efficiency of government investment on                －  Taipei Statistical Database
         on Transportation             Transportation                                          transportation construction directly influences the      －  Department of Urban Development, Taipei
                                                                                                                    quality of urban transportation.                                         City Government
   C1.Accessibility of the Public Numbers of MRT stations, joint bus         The number of public transportation stations directly   －  Taipei Transportation Statistical System
         Transportation                  routes, and YouBike stations                    affects the intentions of people to use public
                                                                                                                    transportation.
   C2.Safety                               Average monthly number of traffic            Reducing the number of traffic accidents promotes     －  Taipei Transportation Statistical System
                                                  accidents                                                  urban transportation safety to at a certain extent.        －  Traffic Division, Taipei City Police
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Department
   C3.Health Impact                   Standard index average monthly              Air quality is crucial to the health and quality of life of －  Environmental Quality Data Storage
                                                  pollution levels                                          people. Transportation waste emissions are a major       System, Environmental Protection
                                                                                                                    cause of urban air pollution.                                             Administration



                                                                                                                                                                                                              
observation  was  set as one month; data  observations   from   January  2009           
to  December    2014   (60   data   observations     in  total)    were    prioritized.                                
Table  3 illustrates    the data  on  the  actual  application    of  the  indices,   how                                                                                                                                     
the  data  are  related   to  the  indices,   and  the  data  source.                                                        
      The  ARIMA   combines   two  types  of  data-generating     process  models,                                                                                                                                                
namely   the  autoregressive      model   and  the   moving   average   (MA)                                                                                                                                                                                                
model.  Formula   (4.1)   shows the  generalized   AR (p) model;  Formula   (4.2)                                            
depicts   the  generalized    MA  model;   and  Formula    (4.3)   displays    the                                                                                                                                                    
formal   de ﬁnition   of  ARIMA   (,pq)(Yang,  2010).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 Each index   can be  used to  generate   multiple    models  with   a good  ﬁt.
(4.1)           The model   with   the  closest ﬁt   for  each index   was  determined   according                                                                                                                                          
      In   Formula    (4.1),     represents   the   intercept     of   the   constant;            
represents   the  lag; ai  is  the  coefficient    of     represents  white    noise.
In  Formula    (4.2),    a   represents   the  intercept    of  the  constant;    p represents  the  lag; 
 is  the  coefficient    of     represents   white   noise.
to  the   Akaike   information      criterion     (AIC)   and  the   Schwarz   Bayesian
criterion     (SBC).  The   smaller    the  AIC   and   SBC  were,   the   higher   the



                                                                                                                                   16

9



Table 4                                                                                                             
Best- ﬁt model and formula derivation of each index.                                           

  Index    Index Application Data                               Finalized                        

                                                                                 
                                                                                                                         
  A1        Ratio of the amount of land used for          ARIMA(1,1,1)                 
               transportation to the amount of land used for all                              
               public infrastructure
  A2        Use of public and non-motor vehicles        ARIMA                            
                                                                                           
  B1        The number of cars and motorcycles per 1000 ARIMA(0,1,2)          
               population                                                                                         
  B2        Budgets by the Taipei Department of        ARIMA(0,1,1)
               Transportation
                                                                                                                         
  C1        The number of MRT stations, bus routes, and ARIMA(1,1,1)
               YouBike stations                                                                               
  C2        Rate of vehicle accidents (cases/10,000   ARIMA(3,1,(1,3))            
               vehicles)                                                                                           
  C3        Pollutant standards index                          ARIMA(3,1,(5))               

                                                                                                                                     
goodness-of-ﬁt of a model was considered to be. When the AIC differed    
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
considerably from  SBC, the models with  the  closest ﬁt  were selected
according to  their   parsimony.  The AIC  and SBC were  calculated  as       
                                                                                                                                      
shown in Formulas (4.4)  and (4.5).                                                                 
                                                                                                               
                                                              
where is the natural  logarithm  of  the sum of  squared errors;        
is  the natural   logarithm  of  the total  number  of  samples; represents 
the total number  of parameters requiring  estimation. Finally,                                                                                                                                                                               2
the ﬁnalized predictive model  and formula derivation  of  each index is        
listed in  Table 4.                                                                                             
     The rates of data changes of the indices from 2009/Q2  to 2016/Q4         
were calculated  according to  the time-series analysis  of the  dynamic       
trends of each index at different time points. Thus, each pair of indices        
had the  same calculation  and comparison  criteria  in  the  subsequent       
DNP analysis. The quarterly  rate  of change was  calculated using  the
                                                                                                                                              
following  formula:                                                                                                
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                              

                   3                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                         
where X (t) represents the mean of the index X in quarter t; T1, T2, and T3   
respectively represent the ﬁ rst, second, and ﬁnal months of a speciﬁed
                                                                                                                                        
quarter.                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                       
                                                              
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                   
where ΔX (t) represents the rate of change in X in quarter t relative to the    
preceding quarter; X (t) represents the mean of X in quarter t; and  X t−1      
represents the mean of  X  in the  preceding quarter.  Table  5 lists  the
quarterly rates of change in each index; the rates of change from 2009/        
Q2 to  2014/Q4   were converted  from  the  data,  whereas those from         
2015/Q1  to 2016/Q4  were projected using the prediction  models.               
                                                                                                                         

4.5. Verifying the DNPs                                                                                   
     There are two types of DNPs: data-oriented and expert-oriented. For       
the data-oriented DNP, the rate of change in each index was applied as            
the basis for comparing  the index  pairs and calculating  their  weights;        
for  the expert-oriented  DNP, the  questionnaires were  used to obtain         
scores from experts for each index. The results of the two types of DNP       
were compared.                                                                                               
     Regarding the dependency among the indices in the DNP, the FDM        
questionnaire was  employed to  identify   the  interactive  relationships        
among the  transportation   sustainability   indices  with  the  closest  ﬁt        
(Fig. 4).  The interactive   relationships were  then implemented  in  the
expert-oriented and data-oriented DNPs to obtain the weighting matrix         
of the internal  dependency among the indices (W2).                                     

4.5.1. Verifying the data-oriented DNP

The data-oriented DNP was divided into  three steps. First, the rates
of  changes in  the  indices  were compared  in  pairs  to determine  the
ARIMA   , (,pdq)              corresponding level of importance of each index in achieving the goal of
city  livability.    Second, the  indices  with   internal   dependency  were
compared  in  pairs  to  determine  the  extent  of  internal  dependency.

Third,  the assessment matrix derived from  the paired comparison was
multiplied  by the weighted vector of each index to calculate the weight (4,1,5)
of each index under the goal of city livability. These steps were repeated
to obtain  the weights of  each index at different time points (t).

4.5.1.1. Weights   of   the   indices  without   considering  their   internal
dependency (w1). The quarterly  rates of  change in each  index in  the
same year  were  compared in  pairs  to  obtain  their   weights  without
considering  their internal  dependency; the changes are represented as
vector w1. The formula of the paired comparison is expressed as follows:

 1  represents the  weight  of  the  index  relative  to  index  
(without   considering  internal   dependency);   respectively
represent  the   amounts   of   changes  in   .   For   a   simple  
(4.4)
comparison of the rates of  changes in the two indices, was divided
by  and the absolute value was obtained.
(4.5)
4.5.1.2.  Index internal dependency weighting matrix. In the  data-oriented  
DNP, the quarterly rates of  change in each index in the  same
year were employed to estimate the dependency among the indices. As
shown in Formula (4.9), represents the dependency weight of 
relative  to Y when X is the control index;  it also represents the effect of
the rate of change in Y on the rate of change in X when X is the control
index. Formula (4.10)  indicates the effect of the rate  of change in Y on
the rate  of change in  X relative  to  the index  Z when X  is the control
index.
  represents the dependency weight of X relative to Y when
X is  the  control  index;    represents the  rate  of change  in  X;  
represents the rate of change in Y.
W2      represents the dependency weight of Y relative to Z when
X is the control index;  , and  respectively represent the rates
of changes in X, Y, and Z.
4.5.1.3. Weights  of   the  indices  involving   their  internal   dependency
.  Formula w  was employed  to  obtain  the weights  of
the indices with internal  dependency . Finally, the extent of change
in the indices at different  time points was used to calculate the changes
in  the weights of the indices over the 31 quarters 

4.5.2. Verifying the expert-oriented DNP
To  compare the effectiveness of data-oriented  and expert-oriented
DNPs, a questionnaire survey was administered to experts. To maintain
consistency between the  two  phases of analysis of  the  questionnaire
survey, the  same interviewees were  recruited  for  the  DNP and FDM
questionnaire surveys. Because of the complexity in the questionnaires,
only  one expert each from the industrial,  governmental, and academic
sector was interviewed in theDNP survey. The expert-oriented DNP was
divided  into  the following  three steps:

4.5.2.1.  Weights  of   the   indices  without    considering their   internal
dependency. The experts were asked to use the revised version of

                                                                                                                 17

10


Table 5
Quarterly  rates of change in  each index (2009–2016).

   Quarter     Index A1                       Index A2                  Index B1             Index B2                         Index C1                         Index C2                        Index C3


                    Land Consumption in   Use of Public and    Congestion         Government Investment  Accessibility of the         Safety (Number of         Health Impact
                    Transportation              Non-motor               Severity               on Transportation           Public Transportation     Vehicle Accidents/         (Pollutant Standards
                                                         Vehicles                                                                                                                             10,000 Vehicles)           Index)



Note: All the  values from    were calculated  from  the actual  data.










                                                                                              Fig.  4. Internal  dependency  among the indices.


                                                                                                                                   18

11


the 1–9 scale created by Saaty (1990) to compare the seven indices in        
pairs,  thereby   obtaining    the   weightings   of   the   indices  without         
considering their internal  dependency (w1). Only those responses with       
consistency ratios lower than 0.1 in  the matrix  of a paired comparison        
were considered to satisfy the consistency test.                                             
                                                                                                                         

4.5.2.2. Index  internal dependency weighting matrix (W2). The experts       
assessed how each control index was affected by the other indices that       
exhibited   internal   dependency  according   to   the   extent   of   their        
influence. The following two  conditions  must be ful ﬁlled: (a)  the self-importance  
of  each index  was  equal (importance=    1);  (b)  when  a             
control index was present, the control index has higher importance than       
the other indices  do (importance>   1).  Although  internal  dependency       
was observed among  the indices,  the  self-importance of  the  control         
index was higher than  those of the other indices.  The level of internal         
dependency among the indices  (W2) was calculated according  to  the        
FDM questionnaire survey results.                                                                                                                     

4.5.2.3. Weights  of   the  indices  involving   their  internal   dependency      
(wC). The  formula w 12×=Ww  c was used to calculate  the weights of         
the indices with internal dependency (wc). Finally, the extent changes in      
the indices at different time points  was used to calculate the changes in      
the weights of the indices at three time points, namely in 2009, in 2013,       
and in 2016.                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                         
4.5.3. Comparing the empirical results of the two DNPs
                                                                               
     Table 6 and 7 and Fig. 5 illustrate  the changes in the weights of the                                                                                                             
transportation  sustainability  indices  in  the  data-oriented  DNP. Land                                               
consumption  in   transportation    (Index   A1)   remained  the   lowest-weighted 
from  2009 to  2016, with  no  signiﬁcant  change in its  trend.                                                                                                                      
The weight  of  the  use of public   and non-motor  vehicles  (Index A2)                                                                                                                         
gradually increased before progressively decreasing; the weight was the                                                                                                                         
third  to  ﬁfth   highest. The  weight  of  congestion severity  (Index  B1)                                                                                                                        
gradually  decreased before progressively increasing; this  weight  was                                                                                                                         
the second to ﬁfth   highest. The weight  of  government investment on                                                                                                                         
transportation (Index B2) gradually increased and remained the highest                                                                                                                         
from  2009 to  2016.  The weight  of  government  investment in  transportation 
(Index  C1)  gradually   decreased before  progressively   increasing; 
this weight  was the  third  to  ﬁfth  highest, exhibiting   the similar 
trend  to  Index B1.  The weight   of safety  (Index  C2) gradually                                                                                                                     
increased before progressively decreasing; this weight was the  second                                                                                                                         
to ﬁfth highest for  the  majority  of  the  period.  The weight  of  health                                                                                                                        
impact (Index  C3) gradually  decreased, remaining  the second lowest                                                                                                                             
throughout the study period.  To further clarify  the trends and compare                                                                                                                        
them to   the  results of  the  conventional  DNP,  the  quarterly  weight                                                                                                                        
changes were converted to annual weight changes, as shown in Table 8                                                                                                                        
and Fig. 6.                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                        
to calculate the weight  changes in the transportation  sustainability  indices 
for Taipei City  according  to  the responses of each expert. The                                                                                                                       
geometric mean of  the  responses from the  experts of  the  industrial,                                                                                                                        
governmental,  and academic  domains was  calculated  for  the  equal                                                                                                                         
considerations of  the  three domains,  thereby  revealing the  dynamic                                                                                                                        
weight changes and sequential order,  as shown in Table  9 and Fig.  7

The weight of Index A1 remained relatively stable and was the fourth or
ﬁfth  highest  for  most  of the  study  period.  The  weight  of  Index  A2
gradually  increased from third  highest in  2009 to the  highest in 2016.
The weight  of  Index B1 remained ﬁfth   or sixth  highest overall.  Index
B2, which  maintained  the highest weight in  2009–2013 and was third
highest in  2016,  was  a vital   index  for  transportation  sustainability.

Index  C1 maintained  the second highest weight  throughout  the study
period.  The weight of Index C2 decreased to sixth before recovering to
fourth.  Index  C3 maintained  the lowest  weight  throughout  the  study
period with  no signiﬁcant change in its  sequential order.
To  further  compare the results of  the expert-oriented  and data-oriented DNP, 
the data-oriented  DNP calculation  results  from  2009 to
2016 were integrated into  the 2009, 2013, and 2016 data through their
geometric means. Subsequently, the comparison results were organized
into  a weight  sequence chart (Table 10.)  and  a dynamic  index trend
comparison chart (Table 11).

Regarding the sequencing results shown in Table 10., Index B2 was
the most critical   index in  both  the  data-oriented and  expert-oriented
DNPs, and Index A2  also exhibited  considerable importance.  By contrast, 
Index C3 was regarded as the least critical  index. The difference
between the two DNPs was the most signiﬁcant for Index C1, the weight
of which  was ﬁfth highest in the data-oriented DNP and second highest
in  the expert-oriented DNP.

Signiﬁcant differences were observed between the two DNPs in their
prediction of  future trends in  the indices. As revealed in  Table 11, the
weight of  Index A1 increased before decreasing in the expert-oriented
DNP, but decreased slightly before increasing in the data-oriented DNP.
The weight  of  Index A2  continually  increased in  the  expert-oriented
DNP, but decreased after peaking in the data-oriented DNP. The weight
of Index B1 remained relatively  steady in the expert-oriented DNP, but
it decreased substantially before  increasing in the  data-oriented DNP.
The weight  of Index  B2 continually   decreased in the  expert-oriented
DNP, but continually increased in the data-oriented DNP. The weight of
Index C2 increased slightly before decreasing and remaining relatively
constant in the expert-oriented DNP, but decreased substantially before
increasing in the data-oriented DNP. The weight of Index C2 exhibited a
profound decrease before increasing in the expert-oriented DNP, but it
increased signiﬁcantly before decreasing in the  data-oriented DNP. Finally, 
the  weight of  Index C3, which  exhibited the  smallest difference
between the two DNPs, remained relatively constant in both  the DNPs.

However, some slight differences could still be identiﬁed. The weight of
Index C3 gradually  increased in  the  expert-oriented DNP, but  slowly
decreased in the data-oriented DNP.
In  summary, the  expert-oriented and  data-oriented DNPs were similar 
in  parts of  the  weighting  sequences and trend  estimation, but
signiﬁcant differences were observed in most of the  index analysis results. 
This was attributed to subjective opinions of the experts, who may
might also be because the data selected in this study were not ideal for
estimation. Consequently, some of the data could not thoroughly reﬂect
the conditions as predicted by the  experts; some of the indices involve
numerous data and  might  be affected  by factors  that are  difficult to
quantify.  However,  because the goal of  this  study  was to  assess the
transportation  sustainability  indices and  strategies for  attaining  high



Table 6
Quarterly changes in the weights of the indices in the data-oriented DNP 

 

                                                                                                                   19

12

Table 7
Quarterly  changes and sequential order  of the weights  of  the indices in  the data-oriented  DNP 




Fig. 5.  Line chart showing the quarterly  changes in the weights of the indices  in         
the data-oriented  DNP.                                                                                                    


livability     in  Taipei   City  through    the  use  of  the  data-oriented    DNP,   the          
follow-up    suggestions  on  sustainable   transportation     strategies   were  still          
based on  the  data-oriented     DNP  analysis   results.                                                  

                                                                                                                                             
4.6.  Sustainable  transportation    strategies to  fulﬁll   the  livability   of  Taipei
City                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                   
      The  sustainable   transportation     strategies   that  fulﬁll    the  livability     of                                                                                                                                                
Taipei   City  were   formulated    according    to  the  analysis   results.   The  orientations 
of the  sustainable transportation strategies in other cities             
were  reviewed   as references  for  revising   the  transportation     strategies   in                   
Taipei.   Subsequently,    the  dynamic   changes   in  the  index   weights    were                                                                                                                                                               
analyzed   to   generalize    the   future   developmental      trend   of   the  transportation 
in  Taipei   City.  Finally,   discussions   and suggestions   were  made             
on the   2020  White  Paper  on the  Transportation   Policies  in  Taipei.

4.6.1.   Referencing  urban  transportation   strategies                                                     
      To   properly     and   effectively      develop    urban    transportation, city         
governments    have  proposed   transportation      plans  that   are  suitable for          
their   respective    cities,   formulated     the   vision   of   those  plans,   and   extended  
their  durations    to 2020,   2040,  or  even into   the second  half  of  the          
century.   The transportation     dimension   of  the  2010  Greater  London   Plan          
involved   six  primary    strategic   goals:  support    economic   and  population
 growth,     strengthen     the   quality    of   daily    living,     improve    safety    and
privacy,     improve     transportation      accessibility,      reduce    the   effect    of
transportation      on   climate    change    and   improve    transportation ﬂexibility, 
and  support    the   2012   London   Olympics    and   Paralympics.     In
addition,    developmental     strategies   were  established    to  support   the  six


Fig.  6. Line  chart showing  the annual  changes in the  weights of  the indices in
the data-oriented  DNP.

Table 9
Annual   changes and sequential  order  of  the  index  weights  according  to  the  expert opinions.

wC                                         2009       Order   2013      Order    2016      Order

A1. Land Consumption in Transportation   

A2. Use of Public and Non-motor Vehicles   

B1. Congestion Severity                   

B2. Government Investment in Transportation 0.2723    

C1. Accessibility of Public Transportation 0.1963     

C2. Safety                                

C3. Health Impact                          




Table 8
Annual changes and sequential  order of  the weights  of the  indices in  the data-oriented  DNP (2009–2016).


                                                                                                                                   20

13


                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         
Fig. 7. Line chart showing the time-dependent weight changes in the indices in
                                                                                                                         
the expert-oriented DNP.
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         
goals. The Transportation 2040  Plan, established to improve  land use        
and transportation coordination  in Puget Sound, involves the following        
practical  design principles:  (a)  promote mixed  land  use; (b)  arrange        
residential areas to  promote high-density  residential  growth;  (c) connect 
neighborhoods with streets, alleys, and sidewalks; (d) integrate the      
activity spaces of surrounding communities; (e) establish semipublic or        
public high-capacity transit  stations near the centers of speci ﬁed cities;      
(f) design plans for  pedestrians and bicycles; (g) provide  citizens with         
open spaces; (h) manage parking spaces; (i) improve the advantages of      
street parking;   and (j)   reduce  the  negative effects  of  parking.   The       
Southeast Michigan Council of Governments established their Principles     
Guiding Development of the 2040 Regional Transportation Plan, which are  
described as follows: (a) emphasize construction on numerous regional       
assets and provide  strategic investments  in  local-  and regional-scale
projects under ﬁnite  ﬁnancial  resources; (b) disclose information   pertaining 
to  transportation  to  the  public;  (c)  improve  the  comprehensiveness 
of transportation   systems; (d)  strengthen various  modes of         
travel  and the  connection  among  local  residents, communities,  and        
global society; (e) enhance the ﬂexibility  and adaptability  of transportation 
in response to  environmental   dynamics; (f)   provide  various         
groups with a cooperation framework; and (g) coordinate the plan with         
other  projects  such as  macroeconomic development  strategies,  sustainability 
frameworks, residential strategies, environmental plans, and        
green infrastructures.  The goals of  the 2040  Regional Transportation        
Plan by the Houston–Galveston Area Council were aimed at improving
safety, reducing congestion, safeguarding ideal asset management and       
operations,  strengthening   regional  economic   competitiveness,  and              
conserving and protecting  natural and  cultural  resources. These goals             
correspond to four  strategies: improving  system management and operations, 
improving   the  states of  ideal  maintenance,  expanding  the              
multimodal  network,  and  coordinating  development.  Finally,  the  effectiveness 
of the  strategies is examined through  the  use of  relevant assessment indices.
In response to climate change, Santos and Ribeiro (2013) proposed
the following  transportation  strategies for  Rio de  Janeiro: (a)  expand
the railway   and  subway network;   (b)  expand  the bus  rapid  transit
system; (c)  improve  sustainable bio-fuel;   (d)  enforce  bus plans;  (e)
promote the  use of  electric  vehicles; (f)   implement  light  vehicle inspection 
and maintenance plans; and  (g) formulate  vegetable oil  and
biodiesel reuse plans.  Shiau (2012)  formulated  15  sustainable transportation 
strategies for  Taipei  City and  determined  their  priority. In
particular, improving  the accessibility  of non-motorized transportation
modes, the   use of   biodiesel  and  bio-gasoline,  demand  responsive
transport services, and accessibility of transportation  to elderly  people
and people with  disabilities are four  of the ﬁve  highest-priority  strategies.
In  summary, most transportation   strategies formulated worldwide
have involved  the following  aspects: (a) accessibility,  promotion,  and
construction  of   public  transportation;   (b)   friendliness,   safety,  and
quality  of daily  living;  (c) traffic   management; (d) maintenance of related assets; 
(e) protection of natural resources; (f) responses to climate
change; (g)  improvement  of system  ﬂexibility.  Some strategies have
been associated with the  disclosure of  government information,   land
use and urban plans, or  master land use plans. Similarly,  most  of the
contents of the  2020 White Paper on the Transportation Policies in Taipei
focused on public  transportation,  friendliness,  safety, quality  of  daily
living,  and traffic management. However, few strategies on maintaining
assets, responding to climate  change, disclosing government  information, 
and  linking  transportation  plans with   urban development  plans
have been proposed by the Taipei  City Government. The disclosure of
government information  has been regarded only as a subtopic in smart
transportation.   The  association of   transportation  plans  with   urban
planning  is barely notable in strategies for constructing an environment
that  is comfortable,  obstacle-free, and bene ﬁcial for developing public
transportation.  No consideration has been given to  maintaining 
assets and responding to climate change.

4.6.2. Future contexts and strategies for the transportation in Taipei City

The goal of this study was to assess the transportation sustainability
indices and strategies for Taipei  City to  achieve the goal  of livability.
Therefore, the  follow-up  suggestions of transportation   planning were
based  on  the  data-oriented  DNP analysis  results.  According  to  the
aforementioned index  analysis results, the future  conditions  of  transportation 
in Taipei City  were analyzed, and suggestions were proposed
on  the 2020  White Paper on the Transportation Policies in Taipei. The
future  conditions  regarding  the  transportation  plans  in  Taipei  were
analyzed as follows:

(a)  No signiﬁcant changes in the land  consumption and  use in transportation were observed. 
This was ascribed to the  status of Taipei City  as  a  high-density  
development   zone,  with   land   use approaching saturation. Although the 
Taipei MRT network continues to  under  development, most  developments have occurred  in  the
New Taipei  City  areas surrounding  Taipei City.  Nearly  all  of the
land  in Taipei  City  has been  used in  planning  and construction;               
undeveloped zones have not change substantially in  their  number              
because of problems in  acquiring   reserved land. Therefore,  little               
concern is required for  Index A1 (land  consumption in  transporta-        
tion)  in current  transportation plans for  Taipei City.                                      
(b) The  weight  of  Index A2 (use  of public   and non-motor  vehicles)               
peaked in 2013. In 2009–2013, numerous MRT lines were opened,              
and the construction  of  public  bicycle stations was expanded, exceeding 100 in 2013. 
Hence, the rate of the  use of public and non-motor  vehicles peaked  in  that  year. 
Although   the weight   of  A2 decreased slightly  in  2016,  this  index  remains  among the  most              
prioritized  indices. Therefore, Index A2 should receive considerable             
attention  in   transportation  planning.  Substantially  associated to               
Index A2  is Index  C1 (accessibility  of  the public  transportation).                
Therefore, Index C1 should  also be highly  prioritized  in  transportation planning. 
According to  the status of Index A1, the  construction of additional MRT stations may 
be limited  by land  conditions.
Therefore, decision makers should  increase the use of  public  and
non-motor  vehicles through  other  dimensions and  improve  their         
accessibility without  increasing land use.                                                 

(c)  The weight of Index B1 (congestion severity) continually  increased             
over time. This is attributable to the increasing prevalence of public        
and  non-motor   vehicles.  Index  B2  (government   investment  in        
transportation)    was   consistently   the    highest-weighted index        
throughout  the  speciﬁed years; not only  has  its weight   changed                                                                                                                   Paper on the Transportation Policies in Taipei.
considerably,  but it   has had also profound  effected  on the  other index weights.

(d)  The weight of  Index C2 (safety) has been one of the highest in the
overall weighting  sequence. Although its weight has dropped more
recently, it has remained highly  crucial for transportation  planning
in  Taipei  City.  This  reveals that  the  urban  transportation  safety
pertaining  to  roads, sidewalks, and bicycle lanes must continue to
receive consideration  in future  transportation  strategies for Taipei
City. Index C3 (health impact) has remained among the indices with
the  lowest weights. Because the applied data corresponding to the
index was the air pollution  index, the air quality  in  Taipei City was
considered stable and acceptable. Therefore, improving  this index
would not  substantially affect  the overall quality  of  transportation
in  Taipei  City. This  index  does not require  attention  in  the short
term.

4.6.3. Suggestions for the 2020 white paper on the Transportation Policies in Taipei

The  general orientation  of  the transportation  strategies for  Taipei
City  was clariﬁed through  the situational  analysis based on the index
weighting  results. The analysis results correspond to the suggestions for
the  urban  transportation  planning  in   Taipei City  in  the  2020  White Paper.



Table 10
Weight sequence results of the data-oriented and expert-oriented DNPs.

  wC                                                                       2009                                                2013                                                 2016

                                                                              Data               Conventional             Data               Conventional             Data               Conventional

  A1. Land Consumption in Transportation           7                     5                                7                     4                                7                    4
  A2. Use of Public and Non-motor Vehicles         3                     3                               3                     3                                3                     1
  B1. Congestion Severity                                     4                     6                                4                     5                                2                    6
  B2. Government Investment in Transportation   1                     1                                1                     1                               1                     3
  C1. Accessibility of Public Transportation           5                     2                               5                     2                                5                     2
  C2. Safety                                                           2                     4                                2                     6                               4                     5
  C3. Health Impact                                               6                     7                                6                     7                               6                     7


Table 11
Weighting sequences in the data-oriented and expert-oriented DNPs.






                                                                                                                   22

15






Fig. 8. Development topics and execution strategies in the 2020 White Paper on Transportation Policies in Taipei. Source: Department of Transportation, Taipei City
Government.


     This  white  paper lists  sustainable transportation,  affinity   and humanism,  
and  livability    and  safety  as the   visions  of  development.              
Corresponding to the  visions are four  speci ﬁc development goals: increase 
the usage rate of environmentally friendly vehicles to 70%, fully         
implement  low-pollution   public   transportation   vehicles in   the  city,        
strengthen obstacle-free environments,  and reduce the  rate  of traffic         
accidents by 3% annually. Numerous execution strategies (Fig. 8) were        
formulated on the  basis of the following  dimensions:                                          
(a)  Establish a  comfortable  and obstacle-free transportation  environment
(b)  Increase the usage rate of public transportation
(c)  Examine transportation  services and fee subsidy mechanisms
(d)  Create a safe and accessible transportation system
(e)  Promote smart transportation  systems
(f)  Create an  environment suitable for developing the public transportation network



                                                                                                                   23

16

(g) Conserve energy and reduce carbon emissions (i.e., fossil fuel usage     
      and motor vehicle  emissions)                                                                         
(h) Construct an environmentally  friendly  transportation  environment               
                                                                                                                               
     The four  development goals of  the white  paper  correspond to the        
results of the analysis of the index weights. Index A2 (use of public and              
non-motor vehicles) accords with the goal of introducing  low-pollution                
public transportation  vehicles, and Index C2 (Safety) accords with  the              
goal of reducing  the rate  of traffic  accidents. In  the index  weight 
dynamic analysis, both of these indices were among those with the highest            
priority.  Therefore, the development goals of introducing low-pollution                
public transportation  vehicles and reducing the rate of traffic  accidents             
should be prioritized over increasing the usage rate of environmentally         
friendly  vehicles and improving obstacle-free environments.                               
     On  the overall  transportation  development  in the  city,  increasing              
the usage rate of  public  transportation,  examining  the transportation               
services and fee subsidy mechanisms, creating a safe and  easy-to-understand 
transportation system, conserving energy and reducing carbon           
emissions, creating  an  environment   suitable  for   developing  public               
transportation,  and  constructing  an  environmentally   friendly   transportation 
environment are  consistent with  the assessment dimensions             
generalized in this study  and should be prioritized  as strategic dimensions  
for developing   sustainable   transportation   in    Taipei   City.               
Regarding establishing  comfortable  and  obstacle-free  transportation               
environments and promoting smart transportation  systems, two related             
indices were disregarded  in the  FDM phase of  the index  assessment,             
because they are  the  lowest-priority   dimensions for   the  sustainable             
transportation  development. For  easy distinction,  Fig.  8 displays  the              
strategic dimensions and strategies consistent with the weight analysis              
results colored in  yellow  and orange  (the other  dimensions and strategies are temporarily disregarded).
               
                                                                      
     On the correspondence between the indices and strategies (Fig. 9),              
managing parking  spaces, establishing a fee-payment mechanism for               
vehicles entering speciﬁc  regions, and externalizing  parking  grids  on              
the sides of  the  main  roads correspond to  Index  B1  (congestion severity). 
Increasing the number of  bicycle lanes and parking facilities in               
the city,  promoting  the  density of  public  transportation  stations, and              
promoting  public-transportation-oriented   development  in   newly  developed 
regions correspond to the  highly  weighted Index C1 (accessibility              
of  public  transportation)  and  must be  prioritized  in  the  development strategies. 
Strengthening the  demand  for  response services, rationalizing   public 
transportation   fees  and  sustainably  managing public  transportation, 
and  providing   comfortable  pedestrian  spaces             
correspond to the  highly  weighted  Index A2  (use of public  and  non-motor vehicles), 
and promoting  road traffic  safety corresponds to the             
similarly  weighted  Index C2 (safety).  These strategies must be prioritized. 
Integrating  regional  transportation  networks, reallocating  road               
spaces, and promoting low-pollution  public  vehicles correspond to the              
low-weight  Indices A1  (land  consumption  in  transportation)  and  C3              
(health impact)  and are thus low-priority   strategies. Popularizing low-ﬂoor buses, 
humanizing  transportation   facilities,   expanding  value-added information applications, 
integrating   and managing  traffic  information, and providing 
convenient public information  services do not correspond to  any of  the 
indices examined  in  this  study. Therefore, these strategies are 
lowest-priority  in promoting  sustainable transportation.                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                               
5.  Policy  implication   and  conclusion                                                                 
                                                                                                                               
     This  section  summarizes  the   analysis results,   namely  the  preliminary 
generalization and selection of the indices, results of the data-oriented DNP, 
and comparison between the  data- and expert-oriented               
DNPs. In addition, from  the data-oriented DNP results, suggestions for              
the Taipei City  Government regarding  the white  paper on transportation policies 
in  Taipei City  are offered.                                                                 
(a)  Aggregating  the  transportation    sustainability   indices:   Previous
studies on livable  cities and  sustainable transportation (Section 2)
were  generalized to derive 18  indices along three dimensions (environmental,  economic, and social).
(b)  Selecting  the  indices  applicable   for  attaining    the  livability    of
Taipei  City:   From the  preliminary   list  of  transportation  sustain-
ability  indices that  satisfy the principles of  a livable  city, the  ﬁrst-phase FDM 
expert questionnaire survey was performed. Six experts with   industrial, governmental, and 
academic   backgrounds  in transportation were  invited  to evaluate the  indices. The threshold
value for FDM selection was 7.30; seven critical indices were above this threshold.

(c)  Data-oriented   DNP  results:  The rates  of changes in  the  indices
were  implemented   in  the  DNP  to  obtain   the  quarterly  weight
changes in the indices in 2009–2016. The weights of Index A1 were
0.1172, 0.1600, and 0.1431 in  2009, 2013, and 2016, respectively.
The weight  non-signi ﬁ cantly increased before decreasing over the
years. Therefore, the  function of  the index  is (1 is negative). 
The index  had the  lowest weight  of  the seven selected
indices.  The  corresponding  weights  for  Index  A2  were  0.1427,
0.1645, and 0.2002.  This index  was initially   among the top  three
indices but became the top-priority   index in  2016, increasing in  a
linear manner. Therefore, the function  of the index is   1 at+ a 2 (a1 is
positive).  The corresponding  weights  of  Index  B1  were  0.1133,
0.1279,  and 0.1164.  No signi ﬁcant changes were observed in the
weight of the index or  its priority.  Therefore, the constant a, which
did  not change over time,  was used to interpret  the index. The respective weights 
of  Index  B1 were  0.2723,  0.2326,  and 0.1696.
Because the weight  of  this  index  decreased steadily and linearly
over time, the function  of the index is   1 at+ a 2 (a1 is negative). The
overall  priority   of  this index  was the  third-highest  in  2016.  The
corresponding  weights   of  Index  C1  were  0.1963,   0.2158,  and
0.1882. No  signiﬁcant changes were observed in the weight of the
index  or  its   priority.   Therefore,  the  constant a,  which   did  not
change over time, was used to  interpret  the index.  The respective
weights of  Index C2 were 0.1289,  0.0729, and 0.1391.  This index
was  one of  three  highest-priority   indices over  the  study  period.
Because the weight  of this  index  initially   decreased and then increased over time, 
the function of this index  is (1 is positive). 
The corresponding  weights of  Index  C3  were  0.0290,
0.0260, and 0.0431.  No signi ﬁcant changes were identiﬁed in the
weight  of  the  index  and its  priority. Therefore, the  constant  a,
which did  not change over time,  was used to interpret the  index.

(d)  Comparison   of  the  data-   and  expert-oriented    DNPs:  The  sequencing
results of the two DNPs show that Index B2 was the most
critical  index  in  both DNPs, Index A2  also exhibited  considerable
importance, and Index C3 was the  least critical.  The most notable
difference between the two DNPs was in Index C1, which  was the
ﬁfth  highest-weighted in  the data-oriented  DNP but second in  the
expert-oriented DNP. Signi ﬁcant differences between the two DNPs
were also noted regarding  their  prediction  of the  future trends  of
the indices. As shown in Table 11, the weight of Index A1 increased
before  decreasing in   the  expert-oriented  DNP, but it decreased
slightly  before increasing in the  data-oriented DNP. In  the expert-oriented DNP, 
the weight of  Index A2 continually  increased, but it in  Taipei City.  
Index B1 remained relatively  constant in  the expert-oriented DNP,
decreased after increasing in the data-oriented DNP. The weight of
but it decreased substantially before increasing in the data-oriented
DNP.  In  the  expert-oriented  DNP, the  weight  of  Index  B2  continually  decreased, 
but the opposite trend was observed in the data-oriented  DNP. 
The weight  of  Index  C2 slightly   increased before
decreasing or remaining  relatively  constant in the  expert-oriented
DNP, but a substantial decrease was observed before an increase in
the  data-oriented  DNP. The  weight  of  Index  C2 profoundly decreased 
before increasing in the  expert-oriented  DNP, yet the opposite was 
observed in the data-oriented DNP. Finally, the weight of


                                                                                                                   24

17




Index C3, which exhibited  the smallest difference between the two              
DNPs, remained constant throughout the  study period  in both  the              
DNPs. However, some slight differences were identi ﬁed. The weight           
of Index C3 gradually increased in the expert-oriented DNP, but the              
opposite was observed in the data-oriented DNP.                                          
(e) Suggestions  for  the white   paper on  the transportation    policies               
in  Taipei  City   according   to  the  dynamic   trends  of  the  index               
weights:  Regarding the four  development goals listed in  the 2020             
White Paper on the  Transportation Policies in Taipei, the  dynamic              
analysis of  the index  weights  shows that  Indices A2  and  C2 are              
among the  highest-priority   indices.  Therefore,  the  two  goals  of              
introducing  low-pollution   public  transportation  and  reducing the
rate  of  traffic  accidents  should be  regarded as  the most  critical
goals. Regarding the execution of the strategies, the management of
parking spaces, establishment of a fee-payment mechanism for the
vehicles  entering speci ﬁc regions, and  externalization  of  parking
grids to  the sides of the  main roads correspond to  Index B1 (congestion  severity). 
Increasing  the  number   of  bicycle   lanes  and
parking   facilities in  the city, promoting the density of public
transportation  stations, and focusing on the development of  public
transportation  systems in  newly developed  regions correspond to
the highly weighted Index C1 (accessibility of public
transportation) and must be prioritized as development strategies.

Fig. 9. Priority sequence of the execution strategies in the 2020 White Paper on Transportation Policies in Taipei.




                                                                                                                   25

18

              
Strengthening     the    demand    for    response    services,    rationalizing
public   transportation      fees,  sustainably    managing    public    transportation, 
and  providing     comfortable    pedestrian   spaces  correspond    to         
the   highly     weighted     Index    A2   (use    of   public     and   non-motor            
Vehicles),   and   promoting    road   traffic    safety  corresponds    to  Index           
C2 (safety),   which   was  similarly    weighted.   These  strategies  must  be          
prioritized.       Integrating       regional     transportation        networks,      
allocating   road  spaces,  and promoting    low-pollution      public   vehicles           
correspond    to   the   low-weight     Indices    A1   (land    consumption     in          
transportation)      and   C3  (health    impact),    both    of  which    are   low-priority strategies.
Popularizing low-ﬂoor buses, humanizing transportation facilities, expanding value-added information applications, 
integrating and managing    traffic   information,      and  providing convenient public information services did not correspond to          
any  of  the  indices   investigated    in  this   study.  Therefore, these  strategies 
should    be  considered    the  lowest-priority       strategies   in   promoting 
the sustainable transportation in Taipei City. The 2020 White  Paper on the  Transportation 
Policies in  Taipei  focused  on  public transportation, friendliness, safety, quality of daily living,                                                                                                                                              
traffic    management,     similar    to   urban    development     strategies   in          
most  cities.  However,   the  Taipei   City  Government   has  proposed  few                 
strategies   on   maintaining      assets,  responding     to   climate    change,                                                                                                                                                     
disclosing   government    information,      and  associating   transportation                   
planning     with    urban    development     planning.     The    disclosure    of                
government   information     has been  regarded  as only   a subtopic  in  the                                                                                                                                                          
development    of   smart   transportation      systems.   The  association    of          
transportation     planning    with    urban   planning    is  barely    notable   in                
strategies   aimed    at  constructing     an  environment      that   is  comfortable, 
obstacle-free,    and   beneﬁcial   for   developing    public   transportation. 
No consideration has been attached to maintaining assets and responding to climate change.                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                
Here,   we  must   make   a  brief   declaration     that   this   study   does  not          
involve   any  emerging   technology    or  new  hardware   architecture    (Alam,                                                                                                                                                            
Mehmood,    Katib,    Albogami,     &   Albeshri,     2017;    Arfat    et   al.,   2017;                                                                                                                                                
Rashid,  Royston,   Gary,   Patrick,    &  Mukesh,   2017),   nor   does  it  involve                  
any personal   information     from  emerging   technology    users.  The focus  of          
this  study   is  to  return    to  the   essence  of  urban   development    with    dynamic 
perspective     that    toward    realistic     urban    situations.     And,    for                
achieving    ultimate     goal  of   urban    sustainability     and   urban    livability                   
(Yigitcanlar     and    Teriman,    2015),     we   expect    to   formulate     a   more                                                                                                                                                          
transparent   and  realistic   urban   development    strategies  that   incorporate            
only  few   concise  tools   and  materials,    including    Fuzzy   Delphi   method,               
extendible   open  data  (i.e.,   big  data),  auto-regressive    integrated    moving                                                                                                                                                          
average  model  and  Analytic    Network    Process. Unlike   the  previous   ANP                
or  AHP  studies   that   focus   on  converting     qualitative     information     into           
quantitative     parameters     (Wey   &   Chiu,   2013;    Chan,   Wey   &   Chang,                                                                                                                                                              
2014),  in  this  study,  we  ﬁ rstly  attempt   to  integrate   the dynamic    changes          
of  extendible    open   data   (big   data)   and   ANP  mechanisms    to   address                
quantitative     issues  directly.    In  other    words,   our  main    innovation    not                                                                                                                                                           
only  reveals  the  dynamic   weight   changes  in data-oriented     ANP, but  also                                                                                                                                              
expresses  the  dynamic    concept   of   indices   or  alternatives     that   change          
overtime. Surely, the emerging technologies, industry-driven mechanisms, intelligent 
systems   or  any   ICT-based   hardware    (e.g.,   autonomic  systems, 
self-driving    vehicles,   cloud   computing,    mobile   big  data          
fogs, internet    of  things,   and  distributed    systems)  that   were  not  covered                 
in this  study   still  worth   to  be considered   in  further    to promote   the  three                                                                                                                                                          
priority     development     goals   (i.e.,   smart    growth;    sustainable     growth,                 
inclusive   growth)    that   set  by  European   Union   (Schlingensiepen     et  al.,          
2016).   Finally,    we  reiterate    that   the  policy    implications     of  this   study                                                                                                                                                          
may  offer  a  solution   for  current    needs  related  to  urban   planning    in  the                
whole   world,   especially   in   developing    cities,  and  may   serve  as a  more          
transparent    decision-making     or  selection   basis  for   developing    sustainable 
and livable urban life in near future.                                                                




